EEL 2 - Round 1
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is not reflective of the
content of the round or tournament.”
0. What word, which is the blank in the new Harry Styles song “As [blank] was”, is also the title of a
movie whose famous poster features a child wearing a yellow raincoat and holding a red balloon?
IT
B1: What film franchise takes place before the time of Harry Potter and centers around Newt Scamander?
FANTASTIC BEASTS
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. Ironically, Lucius Ambivius Turpio says that Caecilius Statius's plays were damned when they were
new to the stage in the prologue of what work, which succeeded after being staged at the funeral games of
Aemilius Paullus and at the same time as a show of tightrope walkers?
HECYRA
B1: What work of Terence was actually performed without a hitch at the funeral games of Aemilius
Paullus?
ADELPH(O)I / ADELPHOE
B2: Perhaps the difficulty of staging the Hecyra was a factor that led Volcacius Sedigitus to rank Terence
at what spot among the top ten?
6TH
2. Who got tangled up in the Syracusan shenanigans of Dionysius II and Dion almost 20 years after he
had purchased the property of the Attic hero Academus and founded a school, and is known for his
Symposium?
PLATO
B1: What work of Plato sees Socrates comically propose a punishment of free meals at the Prytaneum for
himself and describe himself as a gadfly that promotes self-reflection?
APOLOGY (OF SOCRATES)
B2: What work of Plato contains the famous allegory of the cave?
REPUBLIC
3. The dire warnings of the god Aius Locutius were ignored by the Romans prior to what event, which
caused the Vestal Virgins to flee to Caere and followed a diēs āter at the Allia River in 390 BC?
{GALLIC / SENONIAN} SACK OF ROME (OF 390 BC)
B1: During the invasion, what group put up much stiffer resistance than the Roman army, as they first sat
in resolute silence when confronted by the Gauls before one of their number, Marcus Papirius, struck a
Gaul with his staff?
OLD MEN // SENATORS // EX-MAGISTRATES
B2: Both the chairs in which the senators sat and the staff of old Papirius were made of what material?
IVORY
4. What author’s 3rd book is consumed by dread of the forthcoming discidium between himself and his
beloved, a descendant of the author of the Bellum Histricum - Hostia - whom he calls Cynthia?

(SEX.) PROPERTIUS
B1: The first book of Propertius’s work makes no mention of political events besides which conflict,
which was economically disastrous to his family?
PERUSINE WAR
B2: The 3rd book of Propertius’s work reverses this apolitical trend through digressions such as an
epicedion for what young heir of Augustus?
MARCELLUS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
5. What city, which Alexander left in the care of Apollodorus of Amphipolis and Mazaeus, was also at
times the capital of Nebuchadnezzar, and Semiramis?
BABYLON
B1: What famous battle between Cyrus the Younger and Artaxerxes II was fought near Babylon?
CUNAXA
B2: While in Babylon in 331 B.C., Alexander reconstructed a ziggurat called Esagila which honored
which deity, who features heavily in the Enuma Elish?
MARDUK
6. What type of object, which scared Theseus's childhood friends, was obtained either while clearing
Mount Cithaeron for Megareus and Thespius or while trapping an animal in a cave and using its own
claws to kill it in Nemea?
LION'S {PELT / SKIN} [PROMPT ON "(ANIMAL) {SKIN / PELT}" WITH "WHAT ANIMAL"]
B1: What hero gained invulnerable skin when Heracles wrapped him in the Nemean Lion's pelt? He was
the son of Heracles's companion who helped him defeat Alcyoneus and take Troy.
GARGANTUAN AJAX
B2: What king of Megara may have avenged Megareus's son and killed the Cithaeronian Lion?
ALCATHOUS
7. What group, which swept down from Transoxiana to take over the ailing Abbasid Caliphate, defeated
the Byzantines at Manzikert in 1071 A.D. and were known as Seljuks and Ottomans?
TURK(OMAN)S [ACCEPT "SELJUKS" PRIOR TO “SELJUKS”]
B1: Following the battle of Manzikert, a man named Malik-Shah established a Sultanate in Anatolia
under what name, which was the Turkic word for “Rome”?
(SULTANATE OF) RUM
B2: The near-fatal Ottoman advance against the Byzantines in the late 1300s A.D. was put on hold in
1402 A.D. when what renowned Central Asian conqueror decisively routed the Ottomans near Ankara?
TIMUR (THE LAME) // TAMERLANE // TAMBURLAINE
8. Becoming so obsessed with his baldness that he wrote a treatise on hair care, what emperor’s
suspicious nature led him to line the palace with white reflective marble and use the title “Dominus et
Deus?”
DOMITIAN

B1: Domitian was an acolyte of the cult of what Egyptian goddess, in whose robes he escaped death in 69
A.D.?
ISIS
B2: In 82 and 83 A.D., Domitian led successful campaigns against what Germanic tribe?
CHATTI
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
9. Differentiate in name between the region that is home to king Iobates as well as the corpse of Sarpedon
and the region that is home to Mount Sipylus and its inhabitants, Niobe and Tantalus.
LYCIA and LYDIA
B1: Some peasants of Lycia were actually transformed into what sort of animal after they tried denying
Latona potable water?
FROG(S)
B2: What king of Lydia gave his name to a mountain range and was the husband of Omphale?
TMOLUS
10. What kind of people, whose easy movement in society allegedly personifies the destruction of society,
consistently murders stepchildren and engages in infidelity according to a long tirade in Juvenal's 6th
Satire?
WOMEN
B1: To what sort of man does Juvenal advise suicide in this 6th Satire? A descritpion is fine.
A MAN CONTEMPLATING MARRIAGE
B2: What imperial sex worker's "dark grandeur" stands out in Satire 6?
MESSALINA
11. What city near the mouth of the Orontes River was founded by Seleucus I as the capital of his empire,
and was made the capital of the province of Syria by the Romans?
ANTIOCH
B1: The modern day city of Antakya is currently part of what country?
TURKEY
B2: Another city by the name of Antioch was located in what Anatolian region?
PISIDIA
12. The reorganization of the army to reflect the new ten tribes as opposed to the original four was the
result of what man, who created 30 trittyes in Attica and a council of 500 to establish a democracy?
CLEISTHENES
B1: What was the size of the council Cleisthenes replaced to proportionally represent demes?
400
B2: What was the term ascribed to the tribe presiding over the council in their 10th of the year?
PRYTANEIS
13. "From all the ships there rose the groans of dying men and the splintering of timbers. Spearing the
men like fishes, they carried them off to their loathsome feast. While they were killing those in the

harbor’s depths, I drew my sharp sword and cut the cable of my dark-prowed vessel." This account relates
the violence of what mythological tribe, who rushed from their homes in Telepylus at the behest of
Antiphates to kill and devour Odysseus's men?
LAESTRYGONES / LAESTRYGONIANS
B1: When Odysseus's men first came to Telepylus they ran into the unnamed daughter of Antiphates near
the Artacia peforming what action? A description is acceptable.
{DRAWING / FETCHING} WATER
B2: What son of Poseidon is said to have founded Telepylus?
LAMUS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
14. Against Aphorbus, a speech dealing with the mismanagement of a swordsmith's estate, was delivered
by what man, who defended Ctesiphon's suggestion to award him a crown and argued for the destruction
of Philip II?
DEMOSTHENES
B1: What man had forced Demosthenes to deliver On the Crown by arguing that the suggestion from
Ctesiphon was illegal?
AESCHINES
B2: What other set of speeches by Demosthenes urged Athens to swiftly help the eponymous city against
Philip II but to no avail?
OLYNTHIACS
————————————————— [FINAL SCORE CHECK]——————————————

EEL 2 - Round 2
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is not reflective of the
content of the round or tournament.”
0. What artist became famous through smash hits such as "Lil Jimmy Skit," "Low Lights," and "Pinocchio
Story," but has also released obscure tracks such as "The Glory," "Through the Wire," and "Stronger?"
KANYE (WEST) // YE
B1: What name, given to Kanye's second child, is also used as a title for figures such as Auxentius?
SAINT
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. What general group of people, who are deemed the teachers of men by Aristophanes, features folks like
Hesiod; the member of a hetaira who critiqued Pittacus, Alcaeus; and the mother of Cleis, the 10th muse
Sappho?
POETS
B1: What other poet, a patriotic Spartan, urged the Spartans to fight for their country and pointed out the
practical advantages of courage?
TYRTAEUS
B2: Name another tyrant of Mytilene whom Alcaeus described as of "low-birth" to express his disdain.
MYRSILUS or MELANCHRUS
2. Who employed men "more fit to be courtesans than courtiers" according to Theopompus, won the
decisive Battle of the Crocus Field against Onomarchos’s Phocians, and subjugated Greece at the battle of
Chaeronea in 338 B.C.?
PHILIP II
B1: Prior to his accession to the Macedonian throne, Philip had been held hostage at what militarily
successful city?
THEBES
B2: What Athenian politician, who described Draco’s laws as being written in blood, scolded Philip for
his irreverent attitude following his victory at Chaeronea?
DEMADES
3. What name was shared by a 12th century emperor called “the beautiful” who succeeded his father
Alexius I, a general named Tzimiskes who assassinated Nikephoros Phokas, and the Biblical figures "the
Evangelist" and "the Baptist?”
JOHN / IOANNES
B1: John Komnenos’s son, Manuel, had to manage the fallout from what military campaign that ran from
1147 to 1150 A.D. and was led by Holy Roman Emperor Conrad III and King Louis VII?
SECOND CRUSADE
B2: John Tzimiskes won a spectacular victory in 972 A.D. at Dristra over what group, who were led by
their Prince Svyatoslav and were based in Kyiv?
RUS'

4.What man, who was decreed not to have a son, was inspired by a dense cloud of bees settling on a tree
to go consult his father Faunus and learn he should marry his daughter to the new foreigner Aeneas?
LATINUS
B1: Who acts as Aeneas's main ambassador when the Trojans go to Latinus's palace to broker an alliance
and settle there?
ILIONEUS
B2: After learning of Latinus's plan to marry Lavinia to Aeneas, Alecto turns into what old servant
priestess of Juno to urge Turnus to wage war?
CALYBE
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
5. Distinguish in philosopher between a native of Ephesus who identified the primary element as fire and
a native of Miletus who used Babylonian information to correctly predict, in 585 B.C., a solar eclipse?
HERACL(E)ITUS and THALES
B1: According to Thales, what was the primeval force and basic building material of the world?
WATER
B2: What term did Heraclitus raise to a philosophical term, no longer meaning just "intelligible speech"?
LOGOS / λόγος
6. The principal station on the caravan route from Seleucia to Antioch, what city was made a Roman
colony by Septimius Severus, which explains the name of its famous leader, Publius Septimius
Odenathus?
PALMYRA
B1: What child nominally succeeded Odenathus as ruler of Palmyra, though governance was carried out
by his mother Zenobia?
VABALLATHUS
B2: Odenathus secured Gallienus’s trust by dispatching Ballista and Quietus, rebels who had been left
behind when what father and son duo of the same name marched west to confront Gallienus?
MACRIANUS
7. Who copies the goal of writing “sine īrā et studiō” from his idol Tacitus, writing a continuation of his
work up to 378 A.D., with a special focus on the career of his old commander, Julian the Apostate?
AMMIANUS MARCELLINUS
B1: How many books comprised Marcellinus’s Rērum Gestārum Librī?
31
B2: What year marks the beginning of the narrative in the Rērum Gestārum Librī?
96 A.D.
8. A tomb smoldered for years holding the body of what woman, who was resurrected as Thyone after she
was burned to a crisp by Zeus's true form?
SEMELE
B1: After Semele was obliterated, Hermes may have taken Dionysus to what mountain where he was
raised by the nymphs?

(MT.) NYSA
B2: In some versions of his death, what man was killed on the order of Zeus for trying to woo his relative
Semele in Thebes?
ACTAEON
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
9. Who curried favor with poor Athenians by inviting them to pick fruit from his orchards after paying off
the debts his father had accrued while attacking the island of Paros, and signaled his support for Sparta by
naming his son Lacedaemonius?
CIMON
B1: Who was this father of Cimon who left him with a hefty debt to pay off?
MILTIADES
B2: After putting down the revolt of Thasos in 463 B.C., Cimon was falsely accused by Ephialtes of
having been bribed by which Macedonian king?
ALEXANDER I
10. Defiantly asking, “How can I be disturbed by the shouts of men like you, to whom Italy is but a step
mother?,” what general blocked Gaius Carbo’s bill legalizing reelection to the tribunate, upsetting the
masses who backed his runs for the consulships of 147 and 135 B.C. to sack Numantia and Carthage?
(P. CORNELIUS) SCIPIO (AFRICANUS) AEMILIANUS [PROMPT ON "SCIPIO AFRICANUS"]
B1: Scipio Aemilianus truly lived long enough to become a villain in the eyes of what wife of his, who
was upset by his stance on the murder of her brother Tiberius Gracchus?
SEMPRONIA
B2: Early in his career, Aemilianus served on the staff of what villainous praetor, who ordered a massacre
of the Lusitanians in 150 BC?
(SER. SULPICIUS) GALBA
11. Seven days of calm sea acted as the hatching period for what sort of bird, into which a loving couple
were transformed after the wife tried drowning herself having seen the body of her dead husband Ceyx?
KINGFISHER(S) / HALCYON(S)
B1: What seer used the cries of a kingfisher to determine that the Argonauts needed to propitiate the rites
of Cybele?
MOPSUS
B2: What couple named their daughter Alcyone to remember the weeping the wife had done when Apollo
seized her from father Evenus?
IDAS and MARPESSA
12. What work has peripeteia in its battles that complement the writing style of candor and brevitās as
well as the lactea ūbertās of its Paduan author who chronicled Rome's history from the founding of the
city?
AB URBE CONDITĀ
B1: What is the term for the summaries of the Ab Urbe Conditā's books?
PERIOCHAE

B2: What man's early speech does Livy describe as being delivered "prīscō illō dīcendī et horridō
modō"?
MENENIUS AGRIPPA
13. What tribe, sometimes referred to as the Tervingi, had good relations with the Romans under their
kings Wallia and Theodoric, but acted as antagonists under Fritigern and Alaric, sacking Rome in 410
A.D.?
GOTHS / GETAE / VISIGOTHS
B1: What emperor suffered a debilitating defeat to Fritigern’s Goths at Adrianople?
VALENS
B2: What Visigothic king undermined the legitimacy of the emperor Anthemius by making advances in
Gaul and Spain?
EURIC
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
14. 4 long sides and 2 short ends is a physical description of what objects, whose 35 unique arrangements
always omitted 2 and 5 and featured the Venus throw that designated the magister bibendī?
TĀLĪ / KNUCKLEBONES
B1: What was the term for the dice box that was also used to toss tālī?
FRITILLUS
B2: Describe what a Venus throw would look like.
EACH OF THE FOUR TĀLĪ WOULD FEATURE A DIFFERENT NUMBER
————————————————— [FINAL SCORE CHECK] ——————————————

EEL 2 - Round 3
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is not reflective of the
content of the round or tournament.”
0. What item, 8800 of which were presented to the bishop of Ravenna each year, was offered to a
passenger by Frank Reynolds during a trying time and came in varieties such as sunny side up and
scrambled?
EGG(S)
B1: What type of animal, notably not presented to the Bishop of Ravenna in any quantity, is depicted
boxing a man in a commercial for John West brand salmon?
BEAR
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. Mount Pentelicus was the Athenians’ main source of what material, which was also produced on the
island of Paros and fashioned into a temple at Delphi and items such as Kouroi?
MARBLE
B1: What family paid for the Parian marble at the temple at Delphi in an attempt to solicit Spartan aid
against the tyrant Hippias?
ALCMAEONIDS / ALCMAEONIDAE
B2: What mountain near the Chalcidic peninsula was a main Athenian (and Pesistratid) source of gold?
(MT.) PANGAEUS / PANGAION
2. Allegedly founded after the Maesian forest was seized from Veii, what city was so important to Roman
commerce that Claudius upgraded its infrastructure, and sat at the mouth of the Tiber?
(THE PORT OF) OSTIA
B1: In 68 B.C., pirates defeated a Roman fleet near Ostia that was under the command of what consul?
(Q.) MARCIUS REX
B2: What newer Roman port, 2 miles away from Ostia, was the focus of Claudius’s construction?
PORTUS (AUGUSTUS)
3. What province, which was split into the districts of Herculia and Iovia by Diocletian, was a direct
possession of the emperor, was governed by an equestrian prefect, and forbade Senators to enter?
EGYPT
B1: Augustus forbade senators from entering Egypt since he feared they would cut off the flow of what
important product to Rome?
GRAIN
B2: By the crisis of the 3rd century A.D., what administrative rank was held by the men who governed
the territories of Sicily, Achaea, and Lucania?
CORRĒCTOR
4. Who amusingly dedicated a work on the calmness of the mind to a man named Serenus, dedicated a
seven book work about charity to Aebutius Liberalis, and a three book work about clemency to Nero?
SENECA THE YOUNGER

B1: The Serenus who was the dedicatee of Dē Tranquillitāte Animī held what nomen, which he shared
with Seneca and Lucan?
ANNAEUS
B2: What other seven book work of Seneca the Younger was dedicated to Lucilius and focused on the
sciences?
NĀTŪRĀLĒS QUAESTIŌNĒS // NATURAL QUESTIONS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
5. Whose stories of giving Odysseus his father's bow and being thrown from the walls of Tiryns by
Heracles were centered around his Oechalian father Eurytus?
IPHITUS
B1: After Heracles killed Iphitus, he sought out what king to purify him? He would later regret refusing
when he lost all but one son.
NELEUS
B2: In what region, where Pylos is located, did Odysseus and Iphitus meet at the house of Ortilochus?
MESSENIA
6. What Roman author based his Eumenidēs and Hectoris Lūtra on the works of Aeschylus, based his
“eating well” on Archestratus of Gela, and his Euhēmerus on the poet of the same name?
(Q.) ENNIUS
B1: What work by what author preserves 11 verses from the Hedyphagetica?
APULEIUS’ APOLOGIA
B2: Similar to the Euhēmerus, what other work by Ennius is named after its subject, and is written in
trochaic septēnāriī?
EPICHARMUS
7. What emperor condemned clerics known as the “three chapters” in an attempt to unify the christian
church, fought wars against rulers like Vitigis and Totila, and faced the Nika riots with his wife Theodora?
JUSTINIAN {I // THE GREAT}
B1: What general oversaw campaigns against Vitigis’s Ostrogoths in Italy and the Sassanids at Dara?
BELISARIUS
B2: Justinian entrusted a key bureaucrat named Liberius to spearhead the Roman reinvasion of what
modern country, assisted by the Visigothic pretender Athanagild?
SPAIN
8. An intricate dance floor on the shield of Achilles is similar to the dance floor of what woman, who bore
Staphylus and Oenopion and was honored by the constellation Corona Borealis?
ARIADNE
B1: What woman was seen dancing along the Ilissus River and abducted by a wind god?
OR(E)ITHYIA
B2: What choral dance was performed by the followers of Pelops while celebrating their conquest of
Pisa?

CORDAX
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
9. Who uses the term “prooimon,” or prelude, to describe the Homeric Hymn to Apollo when he quotes it
in his History, which also recounts the Melian dialogue and Pericles’s funeral oration?
THUCYDIDES
B1: Lines 1-178 of the Homeric Hymn to Apollo deal with what location that was sacred to Apollo?
DELOS
B2: Thucydides verifies the accuracy of the dates he reports by cross-triangulating the eponymous ephors
of Sparta, archons of Athens, and high priests of what city?
ARGOS
10. Although unsuccessful attempts were made by the Rus in 860 A.D. and by the Umayyad Caliphate in
717 A.D., what was successfully carried out in 1204 A.D. by the 4th crusade and in 1453 A.D. by the
Ottomans?
{SIEGE / SACK / CAPTURE} OF CONSTANTINOPLE
B1: The 4th Crusade’s decision to attack Constantinople was heavily influenced by the presence on the
expedition of Enrico Dandolo, the Doge of what Italian city?
VENICE
B2: Who was the Byzantine emperor who tried and failed to defend the city from the Ottomans in 1453
A.D.?
CONSTANTINE XI
11. What work, a part of which was rediscovered in the Codex Traguriensis, sees its narrator discuss the
decline of oratory, get involved in the rites of Priapus with a random woman, and attend a party led by the
freedmen of a rich and tasteless man?
SATYRICŌN
B1: Who is the rhetoric teacher the narrator Encolpius discusses the decline of oratory with?
AGAMEMNON
B2: Who is the woman who involves Encolpius and company in the rites of Priapus?
QUARTILLA
12. What group, the first to build ships and fit them with sails, were born from the grief in solitude of a
son of Zeus who watched his island become populated with transformed ants?
MYRMIDONS
B1: The Myrmidons eventually migrated from Aegina to what Thessalian city with Peleus?
PHTHIA
B2: The eponym of the Myrmidons was the father of Eupolemeia, and thus grandfather of what Argonaut
who had an unfailing memory?
AETHALIDES
13. Who declared that more men worship the rising sun than the setting sun when demanding that his
defeat of Iarbas and Domitius Ahenobarbus be rewarded with a triumph by Sulla, who had given him the
ironic nickname “Magnus?”

POMPEY / CARLSEN
B1: Pompey became important to Sulla’s cause by virtue of being the largest landowner in what Italian
region?
PICENUM
B2: Sulla did not mention Pompey in his will partially due to the latter’s support for what ambitious
politician, who led an insurrection after Sulla’s death?
AEMILIUS LEPIDUS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
14. What man, the lead of a posthumously produced tragedy, spends his final days in a village in Athens
where he stays with his daughter and curses his quarreling sons?
OEDIPUS
B1: Why does the play Oedipus at Colonus feature an ode to the village?
IT IS THE BIRTHPLACE OF SOPHOCLES
B2: The place Oedipus initially chose to sit down at turned out to be sacred to what mythological group?
FURIES / EUMENIDES
————————————————— [FINAL SCORE CHECK] ——————————————

EEL 2 - Round 3a
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is not reflective of the
content of the round or tournament.”
0. "Deciduous" is the first type of what objects, which tend to "erupt" at around 6 months into life and if
left untreated after interacting with copious amounts of goldfish will develop cavities?
TEETH
B1: What animal's notable body part is actually a tooth that some people think is a horn?
NARWHAL
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. What color forms the names of a pair of siblings who allied with the suitors, a Greek seer who used his
prophetic powers to help his brother Bias, and the nickname of Heracles that described his bottom?
BLACK / μέλᾱς
B1: What pair of brothers had been warned of a man with a "black-bottom," Heracles, and only found out
they had messed with him while he carried them?
CERCOPES
B2: What was the Greek for the nickname that referred to Heracles?
MELAMPYGOS / MELAMPUGOS / MELAMPYGUS
2. What work identifies the primary cause of its events as "mōs partium et factiōnum," features a speech
about rebelling against the "paucī," and details the first time "men dared to oppose the insolence of
nobility"?
BELLUM IUGURTHĪNUM
B1: What tribune delivered that speech urging the people to rebel against the "paucī"?
(C.) MEMMIUS
B2: In Marius's speech he talks about the establishment of an aristocracy centered around what concept?
A Latin word is required.
VIRTŪS
3. What author, who wrote about the periods of history before and after Polybius's in his lost Historical
Commentaries, wrote a 17-book encyclopedia of countries that criticized Eratosthenes's work and
somehow defended Homer as a geographer?
STRABO
B1: Where in the Pontus was Strabo born?
AMASEA
B2: What queen of Pontus was perhaps the person Strabo initially wrote his Geography for?
PYTHODORIS
4. Referred to as a “wall-growing creeper” by Constantine, what emperor wrote a history that began with
the line “Inde berzobim, deinde Aizī prōcessimus,” and built a bridge across the Danube designed by
Apollodorus of Damascus?
TRAJAN

B1: At what city in Cilicia did Trajan die?
SELINUS / TRAIANOPOLIS
B2: The imperial stopgap Nerva perhaps felt compelled to elevate a commander like Trajan following a
revolt led by which spooky Praetorian Prefect?
CASPERIUS AELIANUS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
5. Biga is the modern name of what river, the site of a battle that saw the armor of Achilles donned by
Alexander the Great and Cleitus the Black save Alexander's life in 334 B.C.?
GRANICUS (RIVER)
B1: What object did Alexander slice apart after the battle between a draw-pole and wagon?
GORDIAN KNOT
B2: What man would have killed Alexander had Cleitus the Black not sliced his arm off?
SPITHRIDATES
6. Initially overshadowed by the eunuch Basil Lekapenos, what Byzantine emperor chose to never marry
during his 49 year reign and is known as “the Bulgar Slayer” for his conquest of Bulgaria?
BASIL {II // THE BULGAR SLAYER}
B1: What Shia caliphate, based in Egypt, did Basil clash with in Syria during his reign?
FATIMID (CALIPHATE)
B2: What name is shared by two generals, surnamed Phokas and Skleros, who led revolts against Basil II
for the first decade-plus of his reign?
BARDAS
7. What conflict, which Ennius claims was won due to the “peddling” tendencies of Rome’s mercantile
opponent, saw battles at such locales as the Lipari Islands, Panormus, and Aegates Islands?
FIRST PUNIC WAR
B1: What impetuous consul failed to make the Carthaginians pay for their half measures by blundering
into a defeat at the Lipari Islands?
(CN. CORNELIUS) SCIPIO ASINA
B2: Members of what family adopted the elephant as a type of family badge following the action at
Panormus?
METELLĪ
8. In Catullus 35, the poet Caecilius is said to be writing a poem about which deity, whose priests, the
Galli, were the namesake of the galliambic meter used in Catullus 63 to capture the frenzy of Attis?
CYBELE // MAGNA MATER
B1: What region in Anatolia is associated with the worship of Cybele?
PHRYGIA
B2: What cult borrowed the practice of baptism in blood from the cult of Cybele?
MITHRAS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————

9. Who was thrown down the Gemonian stairs on October 18th after being denounced in a letter read by
Memmius Regulus, ending his hope to marry Livilla and become more than Tiberius’s praetorian prefect?
SEJANUS
B1: What woman, who wrote several letters to Tiberius in support of Huell Babineaux, also precipitated
Sejanus’s downfall by writing the emperor a letter detailing the prefect’s abuses?
ANTONIA (THE ELDER // MAIOR)
B2: When Regulus began reading the letter, Sejanus was under the impression that it would contain
Tiberius’ official declaration granting him what specific power?
TRIBŪNĪCIA POTESTĀS // TRIBUNICIAN POWER
10. What cōnsulāris Liguriae et Aemiliae defeated Arianism in the west at the council of Aquileia,
commented on the six days of Creation in his Hexameron, and detailed precepts of living and instructions
for priests in his Dē Ōfficiīs Ministrōrum?
(ST.) AMBROSE
B1: He engaged in a dispute with what other author over the Altar of Victory?
SYMMACHUS
B2: Although Ambrose may be the "father of church song," what author deserves credit for the first
hymns in Latin whose author is known?
HILARY (OF POITIERS)
11. What man, whose visit to Oeneus stopped two men fighting on the Trojan battlefield, fathered Isander
and Hippolochus with Philonoe after defeating the Solymi and Amazons?
BELLEROPHON
B1: In the Iliad we also learn that Bellerophon killed what Tirynian queen?
ANTEIA
B2: Before Glaucus's story, Diomedes spoke of not wanting to wound him in case he is a god, citing what
blinded king as an example?
LYCURGUS
12. Rectangles, squares, irregular shapes, and net-like arrangements are all patterns on what sort of
objects, whose construction methods are known as quadrātum, incertum, and rēticulātum?
WALL(S)
B1: Name a wall-facing other than quadrātum, incertum, and rēticulātum.
TESTĀCEUM or QUASI RĒTICULĀTUM or ĀFRICĀNUM or VITTĀTUM or MIXTUM
B2: Name any of the three main sizes of bricks.
BESSALES or SESQUIPEDALES or BIPEDALES
13. The gods are said to have dropped honey onto the lips of what author, who learned the flute from his
uncle Scopelinus and was encouraged to make more mythological references by his rival Corinna?
PINDAR
B1: Noticeably, and perhaps dangerously, many of Pindar’s patrons held what political office?
TYRANT

B2: What poet, renowned for his ‘hissless hymns’ that omitted any ‘s’ sounds, taught Pindar the art of the
dithyramb?
LASUS (OF HERMIONE)
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
14. Ultimately replaced by graphē paranomon, what phenomenon was thought to have been a “fate
which did not deserve” the low-born Hyperbolus, though it did befit such great men as Themistocles in
471 and Aristides in 482 BC?
OSTRACISM
B1: What relative of Peisistratus was the first man to be ostracized?
HIPPARCHUS (SON OF CHARMES)
B2: To whose court did Themistocles flee to after being ostracized?
ARTAXERXES I
————————————————— [FINAL SCORE CHECK] ——————————————

EEL 2 - Round 3b
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is not reflective of the
content of the round or tournament.”
0. If you travel often or frequently watch movies you are more likely to experience what phenomenon, a
French loanword that describes someone being in a present situation and feeling like they have
experienced the same situation in the past?
DEJA VU
B1: A homophone, Daeja, is a dragon that can be found in what League of Legends version of Dota 2
Autochess?
TFT // TEAM FIGHT TACTICS
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. Along with Gaius Fabricius, what plebeian commander was idealized by Cato the Elder as a model of
rustic virtue, and is known for commissioning the Anio Vetus as censor in 272 B.C. and for defeating
Pyrrhus at Beneventum?
(M’) CURIUS DENTATUS
B1: What foul-mouthed commander, a fellow plebeian, helped Dentatus end the Third Samnite War by
defeating the Linen Legion at Aquilonia in 293 B.C.?
(L.) PAPIRIUS CURSOR
B2: After dispatching the Samnites, what other old enemy did Dentatus attack in 290 B.C., imposing on
them cīvitās sine suffrāgiō?
SABINES
2. The couplet "[blank] grammaticus, Latīna Sīren, / quī sōlus legit ac facit poētās" describes what
author, who edited Lucilius and wrote two poems titled Dictynna and Lȳdia?
VALERIUS CATO
B1: When it came to being a grammarian, Valerius Cato edited what author who was a granduncle of
Pompey?
(C.) LUCILIUS
B2: What work of Valerius Cato is a libellus that asserts his free birth and explains that he was orphaned?
INDIGNĀTIŌ
3. What name is found both in a speech about the death of the brother of Lysias and a speech about the
murder of an adulterer delivered by Lysias?
ERATOSTHENES
B1: Who is that brother of Lysias that was murdered?
POLEMARCHUS / POLEMARCHOS
B2: What speech of Lysias is rather unique in its contents urging the Greeks to unite against the peril of
foreign tyrants?
OLYMPIC ORATION

4. What event saw all the following? The death of Demoleon to avenge Crantor. The death of a couple
who were always together, Hylonome and Cyllarus. The flight of a golden bird from under oak trees that
was allegedly Caeneus. The death of the initial instigator Eurytion at the hands of Theseus.
LAPITHS v CENTAURS // {WEDDING / MARRIAGE} OF P(E)IRITHOUS and {HIPPODAME /
HIPPODAM(E)IA}
B1: Crantor was actually the son of what man, who had an armory at Eleon that Autolycus stole a helmet
from?
AMYNTOR
B2: Theseus managed to kill Eurytion using what sort of object, which is also in a constellation
commemorating the deeds of Mastusius?
(MIXING-)BOWL
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
5. The rustic piety of the Ambarvalia is addressed in the work of what author, who also addresses the
soldier Macer and the birthday boy Cornutus, possibly the Cerinthus who also appears in this author’s
corpus?
TIBULLUS
B1: Although she is not mentioned within Tibullus’s corpus, what woman does Horace reveal as another
love interest of Tibullus in Carmen 1.33?
GLYCERA
B2: In Book 1 of the elegies, Tibullus threatens divine retribution against Pholoe, whom he spied
sweet-talking which of the poet’s love interests?
MARATHUS
6. The Byzantine general Tatikios, the French noble Godfrey of Bouillon, and the Norman adventurer
Bohemond led what expedition, which captured Jerusalem at the behest of Urban II in 1099 A.D.?
{1ST / PRINCE'S} CRUSADE
B1: What fanatical monk led the so-called “people’s crusade,” which was smashed to bits by the Turks
before the rest of the First Crusaders arrived?
PETER (THE HERMIT)
B2: During the siege of Antioch, a French mystic named Peter Bartholomew discovered what holy
weapon, which had been used by St. Longinus to pierce the side of Christ?
(HOLY) LANCE
7. What city’s contentious relationship with Athens included multiple Athenian seizures of their ports at
Pegae and Nisaea, this city’s tyrant Theagenes supporting the coup of Cylon, and harsh Athenian decrees
issued by Pericles which helped spark the Peloponnesian war?
MEGARA
B1: What Archaic age Athenian leader gained his political popularity by seizing the port of Nisaea?
P(E)ISISTRATUS
B2: What political title, used by both Athens and Megara, translates as “war-leader?”
POLEMARCH

8. Perhaps Harvest Home indicates that Cos is the birthplace of what author, who wrote about the
apotheosis of Hylas, a festival in Alexandria visited by Syracusan women celebrating Adonis, and about
30 bucolics?
THEOCRITUS
B1: In his Thyrsis, the shepherd Thyrsis sings a ballad about the afflictions of what notable pastoral
character?
DAPHNIS
B2: To what ruler did Theocritus write a panegyric that speaks of their descent from Heracles?
PTOLEMY II (OF EGYPT)
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
9. What man, either at Maenalus in Arcadia or Onchestus in Boeotia, watched a young man use
brushwood sandals and drag cattle backwards before being duped and turned into stone for reporting the
crime?
BATTUS
B1: How did Hermes physically hide the fact that he had sacrificed two cows to the gods at the Alpheius
river?
HE BURNED THE HOOVES AND HEADS
B2: After the resolution of the dispute between Apollo and Hermes, Apollo further offerred Hermes the
art of divining pebbles which was in the keeping of what nymphs of Mt. Parnassus?
THRIAE
10. An unfinished poem about the death of an adopted child can be found in what work, which reflects the
author's improvisation and "celeritās" as he celebrates a statue of Domitian and mourns the death of a
sparrow in 32 "sketches" in 5 books?
SILVAE
B1: Poem 5.4, perhaps the most famous of the Silvae, is an address to what concept who has abandoned
him?
SLEEP
B2: Who is the owner of the parrot, whose death Statius laments?
MELIOR
11. Who leaned a couch and a mattress against a door in the palace complex in a futile effort to stay alive,
a far cry from the banquets of 2,000 fish and 7,000 birds he threw after leaving Lower Germania in 69
A.D.?
VITELLIUS
B1: Two days prior to his death, Vitellius’s partisans had captured and executed Flavian partisans led by
which family member of Vespasian?
FLAVIUS SABINUS
B2: The Flavian legions which defeated the Vitellians at the second battle of Cremona were co-led by
Antonius Primus and what other man, who would later be appointed praetorian prefect by Domitian?
CORNELIUS FUSCUS

12. Home to the Classis Moesica and Classis Pannonica, what river formed Rome’s border with peoples
such as the Huns and Dacians in the Northeast of the empire?
DANUBE / DĀNUVIUS [DON'T READ "DĀNUVIUS" IF THEY DON'T SAY IT]
B1: What was the Latin name of the Danube?.
DĀNUVIUS
B2: What modern day country, most of whose northern border is made up of the Danube, occupies the
area known to the Romans as Thrace?
BULGARIA
13. What Athenian, called one of two “pestles grinding down the mortar of war” by Aristophanes, had
advocated for the execution of all Mytileneans and died at the second battle of Amphipolis in 422 B.C.?
CLEON
B1: What Spartan general, Aristophanes’s other pestle, was Cleon’s opponent at that battle?
BRASIDAS
B2: What man, otherwise unmentioned in the histories, argued for leniency towards the Mytileneans?
DIODOTUS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
14. The view that it was not Prometheus but Phoroneus who discovered the use of fire was a view
purported by what city, which was traded to Megapenthes and saw its springs of Asterion and Cephisus
dried up by Poseidon after choosing Hera?
ARGOS
B1: What man, a companion of Diomedes, returned to Argos where his son Cometes had taken the throne
from Diomedes?
STHENELUS
B2: Another change in the rule of Argos was when Danaus managed to take the throne from what man,
who took the sign of a wolf slaughtering the lead bull to cede his power?
GELANOR
————————————————— [FINAL SCORE CHECK] ——————————————

EEL 2 - Round 4
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is not reflective of the
content of the round or tournament.”
0. Note to players, there will be an extra clue after the question is read twice. Pencil and paper ready. If
you were to start with 28 watermelons and buy 6 watermelons per hour, how many watermelons would
you have after 78 hours? Extra clue: You can think about the math as the quantity (80-2) times 6 plus 28.
496 WATERMELONS
B1: 6, 28, and 496 are all what sort of number, whose factors, excluding itself, sum up to the number
itself?
PERFECT (NUMBERS)
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. A final resurgence from 745 to 747 A.D., during the reign of Constantine V, marked the temporary end
of what phenomenon, which began in the 540s A.D. and would, after passing through Constantinople in
1347 A.D., wipe out at least a third of Europe’s population?
{BLACK / BUBONIC} PLAGUE
B1: Constantine V stood by and did nothing while the exarchate of Ravenna and Rome itself were
annexed by what people, whose capital was located at Pavia?
LOMBARDS
B2: The sitting pope, Stephen II, traveled to the court of the Frankish king Pepin and anointed him as king
in 754 A.D., setting a precedent that would be expanded upon by what son of Pepin?
CHARLEMAGNE
2. Obscure saints such as Chelidonius and Eulalia are joined by famous ones such as Lawrence and Agnes
in the 14 hymns of what man’s gory Peristephanon, which contrasts with the celebratory Cathamerinon?
PRUDENTIUS
B1: The Chelidonius and Emeterius who feature in Prudentius’s Peristephanon were both from what
Spanish city, which was also Prudentius’s hometown?
CALAGURRIS / CALAHORRA
B2: What work of Prudentius deals with mysteries of the trinity and Christ's passion in hexameters?
APOTHEŌSIS
3. Merry melodies of flutes accompanied the destruction of what structures, which were soon rebuilt using
Persian ships and money accrued by Conon, and had linked the port of Piraeus to Athens?
LONG WALLS
B1: What Athenian politician had passed a law forbidding anyone to propose the dismantling of the walls
prior to surrendering to Sparta in 404 B.C.?
CLEOPHON
B2: Conon gained the prestige and wealth to return to Athens following his victory over Sparta in what
naval battle of 394 B.C.?
CNIDUS

4. A myrtle tree's leaves were pierced with holes by a woman watching what young man exercise, who
eventually became a king in Aricia and set up a precinct to Diana after fittingly being torn apart by his
horses and revived as Virbius?
HIPPOLYTUS
B1: Where near Rome did Virbius establish the precinct to Diana?
LAKE NEMI
B2: What would women in Troezen dedicate to Hippolytus on their marriage day?
(A LOCK OF) HAIR
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
5. A treaty that was stored in the temple of Semo Sancus confirmed the treaty of isopolity between Rome
and which city, where the cutting of poppy-heads signaled Sextus Tarquinius to kill their leaders?
GABII
B1: What city, belonging to the Rutuli, was Superbus besieging when Brutus’s rebellion broke out?
ARDEA
B2: Around 485 B.C., the Romans made a treaty of friendship with what tribe, which split the territory of
the Aequi from that of the Volsci?
HERNICI
6. Characters such as the bogeyman/ogre Manducus and works such as Hercules the Tax Collector
characterized what genre, which was popularized in the time of Sulla by Pomponius and Novius?
ATELLAN FARCE
B1: What stock character in Atellan Farce has a name conspicuously similar to that of a famous early
comedic playwright?
MACCUS (SIMILAR TO PLAUTUS)
B2: The Atellan farce had a long history as a comic finale that accompanied more serious presentations.
What was the Latin term for this role?
EXODIUM
7. What sort of object, which reappeared on Ortygia after being thrown into the Alpheius in the
Peloponnese, may have never touched the lips of a poor vineyard owner named Ancaeus and was the
mode of transportation used to visit Erytheia by Heracles?
CUP
B1: The waters of the spring Arethusa were also discolored due to the sacrifices of oxen at waht location
in the Peloponnese where the Heraean Games were held?
OLYMPIA
B2: A cup by Douris depicts what man being regurgitated from a dragon he slew from the inside, just as
Heracles did with a sea-monster to save Hesione?
JASON
8. What Macedonian general, who also wrote a history of Alexander the Great’s campaigns, defeated an
invasion led by Perdiccas by drowning his troops in the eastern delta of the Nile River in 321 B.C.?
PTOLEMY I

B1: In his history of Alexander’s reign, Ptolemy claims that the Macedonian army crossed streams using
bridges made of dead Persians after what battle against the Persians in 333 B.C.?
ISSUS
B2: Name either the man who became regent of the Macedonian kings or the man who became strategos
of Asia at the conference of Triparadisus in 321 B.C..
ANTIPATER and ANTIGONUS (1) RESPECTIVELY
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
9. Initially existing only as temporary aestīva before the invention of statīva and hībernā, what type of
structure became more permanent during Augustus’s reign and was laid out using a grōmā to measure the
Via prīncipālis?
(MILITARY) CAMP/ CASTRA
B1: What was the term for the consul’s tent in a camp, derived from an outdated term for the Republic's
top elected magistrate?
PRAETŌRIUM
B2: What junior magistrate, typically in charge of pay-related functions, was the other official to receive a
designated tent in the Roman camp?
QUAESTOR
10. What author tells the love story of Abradates and Panthea and uses Tigranes as an allegory for his
teacher Socrates in his Cyropaedia, but is more famous for his Anabasis?
XENOPHON
B1: What king of Sparta did Xenophon write an encomiastic biography about?
AGESILAUS (II)
B2: What Boeotian friend of his invited Xenophon to join the army of Cyrus the Younger in 401 B.C.?
PROXENUS
11. What emperor, who temporarily esteemed his eunuch Chrysaphius more than his sister Pulcheria,
wrote a law code that was published in 438 A.D., and reigned for a then-record 42 years?
THEODOSIUS II
B1: What seemingly meek cousin of his did Theodosius II equip with an army to retake Ravenna from the
usurper Johannes in 425 A.D.?
VALENTINIAN III
B2: Before personally stabbing Aetius to death, Valentinian III is recorded as exclaiming, “I am not in
danger- I am the danger” to what wife of his, one of Theodosius II’s daughters?
(LICINIA) EUDOXIA
12. What specific time finally saw a division of land among Procles and Eurysthenes, Temenus, and
Cresphontes after the failed attempts of Aristodemus and Hyllus to reclaim land for the Heraclids?
THIRD {CROP / HARVEST}
B1: Another misinterpretation by the Heraclids was of the phrase "the narrows." What location was the
Delphic Oracle referring to with that phrase?
GULF OF CORINTH

B2: The second time they failed to set out was because what man had killed a soothsayer among them
named Carnus?
HIPPOTES
13. Julius Paris reduced to a compendium the work of what author, who subdivided it into topics
concerning religion and severity, used it to denounce Sejanus, and drew more from Roman than foreign
examples to recount relevant memorable sayings?
VALERIUS MAXIMUS
B1: What was the title of that work of Valerius Maximus?
FACTŌRUM ET DICTŌRUM MEMORĀBILIUM (LIBRĪ NOVEM)
B2: What other man composed a compendium of Valerius Maximus's work, though his stops at book
3.2.7?
JANUARIUS NEPOTIANUS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
14. Who disappointed the Italians when he agreed to fight the Saluvii on behalf of the Massilians, and was
executed by Lucius Opimius alongside Gaius Gracchus without granting them the citizenship he had
promised as consul in 125 B.C.?
(M.) FULVIUS FLACCUS
B1: In an attempt to prevent his election to the consulship, influential senators induced what tribune to
pass a bill expelling non-citizens from Rome in 126 B.C.?
IUNIUS PENNUS
B2: What Roman consul built upon Flaccus’s northern campaigns by defeating the Arvernian king
Bituitus near the Isere River in 121 B.C., and was said to have only lost 15 men?
(Q.) FABIUS (MAXIMUS) ALLOBROGICUS
————————————————— [FINAL SCORE CHECK] ——————————————

EEL 2 - Round 4a
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is not reflective of the
content of the round or tournament.”
0. What author, in 188 installments, covers famous figures such as Billimer and Ballomar as he narrates
events from Romulus to Augustulus in his History of Rome?
MIKE DUNCAN
B1: In a subsequent venture, Duncan wrote a panegyrical biography of what French figure?
MARQUIS DE LAFAYETTE // GILBERT DU MOTIER
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. What monarch, who was nearly killed by a falling rock at Delphi while returning from a meeting with
the Senate in 172 B.C., carried on his father Attalus I’s feud with Macedon to preserve Pergamum’s
power?
EUMENES II
B1: In 189 B.C., Eumenes persuaded what Roman commander to take harsh punitive measures against the
Galatians?
(CN.) MANLIUS VULSO
B2: In contrast to the harsh treatment of the Galatians, the Romans only levied a small fine on what king
of Cappadocia, who had rendered material aid to Antiochus III?
ARIARATHES (IV)
2. What man, who is described as "not very powerful in battle nor quite all there in his mind," was
honored on his burial mound with his oar after his captain learned that he had broken his neck and died
while drinking?
ELPENOR
B1: What crew member of Odysseus when they came to Aeaea heard the singing of Circe and sought her
out?
POLITES
B2: What crew member of Odysseus was the one to help Eurylochus and holding sacrificial victims and
tying Odysseus to the mast?
PERIMEDES
3. Light, comfortable boots were named after what general, who was acquitted after the disaster at Embata
in 356 B.C. and gained fame by introducing longer swords used to defeat a Spartan regiment at Lechaeum
in 390 B.C.?
IPHICRATES
B1: Iphicrates's unit at Lechaeum comprised what type of soldier, who threw javelins and carried an
eponymous Thracian shield?
PELTAST(S)
B2: The disaster at Embata forced Iphicrates into trial after the bad weather made him unable to help and
thus abandon what other general who was clapped at Embata?

CHARES
4. What work, which contains the earliest idyllic poetry of the Greeks, begins with Trygaeus ascending to
heaven to end the war only for the gods to wash their hands of the Greeks and leave it all to the
personified War who buries the titular counterpart?
PEACE
B1: Trygaeus managed to get to heaven by riding on what animal?
(DUNG) BEETLE
B2: What work from the year prior questioned the lack of pay for jurors and the corruption that can result
from it?
WASPS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
5. What position, held by men like John the Grammarian, the layman Photius, and John Chrysostom,
competed with the Roman papacy for prominence, and still leads the Eastern Orthodox church today?
ECUMENICAL PATRIARCH // {PATRIARCH/ARCHBISHOP/BISHOP} OF CONSTANTINOPLE
B1: Relations between the Eastern and Western Churches reached a boiling point during what event in
1054 A.D., which saw 3 western prelates excommunicate the Ecumenical Patriarch, though relations did
not completely cease afterwards?
THE GREAT SCHISM (OF 1054)
B2: In an earlier clash between East and West, the papacy “discovered” what famous forged document,
which saw Constantine I give the pope the power to crown a Western emperor?
THE DONATION OF CONSTANTINE
6. The orator Licinius Calvus is praised in Catullus 53 for his attacks on what man, the target of a hostile
speech by Cicero in 56 B.C. for testifying against Publius Sestius and a known Caesar loyalist?
(P.) VATINIUS
B1: What speech, delivered in 54 B.C., sees Cicero defend an Aedile (a personal friend) against charges
of bribery?
PRŌ PLANCIŌ
B2: What term did Quintilian use to describe Calvus’s unique flow?
SĀNCTITĀS
7. What usurper held his own against lesser rivals such as Vetranio and Nepotianus before suffering a
crushing defeat at the battle of Mursa against Constantius II in 351 A.D.?
MAGNENTIUS
B1: Magnentius had begun his revolt in 350 A.D. by killing what son of Constantine?
CONSTANS I
B2: What brother of Julian the Apostate did Constantius II leave behind to guard the eastern frontier while
the latter went west to fight Magnentius?
(CONSTANTIUS) GALLUS

8. Philostratus famously cataloged the lives of what people, who dominated higher education and
popularized oratory and rhetoric, straying away from philosophy under the lead of Herodes Atticus in the
2nd century A.D.?
SOPHISTS
B1: Who was the most distinguished pupil of Herodes Atticus that wrote 55 Orations for reading and
posterity?
AELIUS ARISTIDES
B2: Philostratus also wrote a life of what holy man from Tyana who predicted Domitian's death?
APOLLONIUS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
9. Who describes with lively freshness various aspects of the festival of St. Felix in his carmina
nātālicia, but also addresses the widespread apprehension felt for Alaric and the Goths in his town of
Nola?
PAULINUS
B1: What was the meaning of the word nātālicium in the context of Paulinus and Felix?
IT WAS THE ANNIVERSARY OF (FELIX'S) MARTYRDOM
B2: Paulinus’s corpus contains verse epistles that he composed in defense of his heavy involvement in the
church that are addressed to what teacher of his?
AUSONIUS
10. What man was leading a group of 300 cavalry when he noticed the glint of a helmet, before capturing
the young man Euryalus and killing him in retaliation for Nisus's aggression for trying to salvage the
night raid?
VOLCENS
B1: Euryalus was betrayed by the helmet he took from what man, perhaps the son of Neptune who was
immune to fire and steel?
MESSAPUS
B2: Nisus's aggression started off by throwing a spear for Volcens that actually killed what companion of
Volcens instead?
SULMO
11. Who began his public career by prosecuting Servilius the Augur, was made the guardian of Faustus
Sulla, and before being replaced by Acilius Glabrio oversaw campaigns with Gaius Triarius against
Mithridates?
LUCULLUS
B1: Servilius the Augur became an enemy of Lucullus’s family by prosecuting and exiling his father for
his misconduct while stationed on Sicily during what war?
SECOND SERVILE WAR
B2: As consul in 74 B.C., Lucullus advised sending what man to deal with rampaging Cilician pirates?
(M.) ANTONIUS CRETICUS

12. Marcus Valerius is the first known member of what college of priests, who place a curse on Rome and
ritually kill a pig after hurling a spear into enemy territory or a special area in the temple of Bellona?
FĒTIĀLĒS / FETIALS
B1: What object would the fetiales use for the ritual killing of the pig?
LAPIS SILEX
B2: Another college of priests, the epulōnēs, arranged what event held for senators after the sacrifices at
festivals of Jupiter Optimus Maximus?
EPULUM IOVIS
13. What Roman historian, whose objectivity and insight were praised by Polybius and Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, wrote in Greek a history that perhaps included Hannibal’s take on the Second Punic War?
CINCIUS ALIMENTUS
B1: What magistracy did Alimentus hold in 210 B.C.?
PRAETOR
B2: Polybius praises Alimentus’s objectivity in covering the Second Punic War while criticizing the
pro-Roman Fabius Pictor and what pro-Carthaginian historian?
PHILINUS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
14. The Persian commander Megabates intentionally bungled what man’s invasion of Naxos in 499 B.C.,
which prompted this tyrant to resign his office and travel to Athens and Sparta, seeking aid for his
rebellion against the Persians in Ionia?
ARISTAGORAS
B1: Who supposedly brought a curse upon the Alcmaeonid house by killing Cylon’s followers in 632
B.C.?
MEGACLES
B2: What Persian commander trapped an Athenian force at Prosopitis in 453 B.C.?
MEGABAZUS
————————————————— [FINAL SCORE CHECK] ——————————————

EEL 2 - Round 5
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is not reflective of the
content of the round or tournament.”
0. Known for its insane drops in difficulty and unnecessarily long winded questions, what tournament
popularized the 2v2 double elimination format in certamen?
EEL 2
B1: What well respected and well run tournament usually occupies this slot in mid-August?
PCL // PREMIER CERTAMEN LEAGUE
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. What region, said to still contain a Druid population in the 4th century A.D. by the poet Ausonius, was
handed over to the Visigoths by the Romans in 418 A.D. and was separated from the Gauls by the
Garumna river according to Caesar?
AQUITAINE / AQUĪTĀNIA
B1: What is the modern name for the Garumna River?
GARONNE
B2: What mountain range forms the southern border of Aquitaine?
PYRENEES
2. What two cities supplied colonists for Rhegium, Naxus, Cumae, and Pithecusae, engaged in a war
around the end of the 8th century B.C. in Euboea over the Lelantos River plain?
CHALCIS and ERITREA
B1: Name another city founded in northeastern Sicily by Chalcis and Eritrea.
CATANA or LEONTINI
B2: Chalcis and Eritrea had chosen Pithecusae since they could exploit the iron deposits from what
nearby island?
ELBA
3. What man, whose quickly cast down purple cloak gave warmth to Odysseus in one of his fake
narratives, was the guise Poseidon took on to hype up Idomeneus and was the leader who brought 40
black ships from cities like Pleuron and Calydon in Aetolia?
THOAS
B1: Who was the son-in-law of Oeneus and father of Thoas that Diomedes turned the throne of Calydon
over to?
ANDRAEMON
B2: In some stories, Odysseus went on to actually father what grandson of Thoas by an unnamed
daughter?
LEONTOPHONUS
4. What name is shared by an obstinate Armenian monarch who was assassinated by Shapur I, a Sassanid
king who seized the kingdom of Lazica from Justinian in 541 A.D., and a Parthian ruler who made war on
Trajan?

CHOSROES / KOSROES / KHUSRO / KHUSRAU / OSROES / KHOSROW
B1: What Parthian monarch took offense at Aulus Gabinius’ support of a pretender to the throne in 56
B.C.?
ORODES (II)
B2: Just as Justinian and Khusrau signed a treaty of “eternal peace” in 532 A.D., Diocletian signed a
similarly optimistic peace treaty with what Sassanid shah in 287 A.D.?
BAHRAM II
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
5. Around 550 A.D., a man named Gildas wrote a Dē Excidiō et Conquestū about what region, which
also served as the subject for the Historia Ecclēsiastica Gentis Anglōrum of Bede?
BRITAIN / BRITANNIA
B1: What scientific work of Bede, which was based on the works of Pliny and Isidore of Seville, almost
shares a name with a famous work of the 1st century B.C.?
DĒ NĀTŪRĀ RERUM
B2: Men residing at Wearmouth and Jarrow were the subject of a work by Bede that deals with what
profession?
ABBOTS
6. What author from Chemmis, who mowed down the children of giants with his vocal sword, declares he
will only go over the last year of the war in book 25 of his 48 book war despite using the first eight books
to reach the birth of his main character, Dionysus?
NONNUS
B1: What is the Greek name for Chemmis?
PANOPLIS
B2: Who is the king of the Indians in Nonnus's Dionysiaca?
DERIADES
7. Which of the following events, if any, did not occur in the region of Boeotia? The establishment of a
village named Hyettus after the murder of Molurus. The mock marriage of Zeus and a wooden statue to
try and fix his relationship with Hera. The death of a dragon by biting down on the spiky armor of
Menestratus. The mass death of the Ectenes and their king Ogygus.
ALL DID // NONE
B1: Who was the most clever man on earth that gave Zeus that advice?
CITHAERON
B2: Another event in Boeotia was a feast of Poseidon near Onchestus that saw what charioteer killing
King Clymenus?
PERIERES
8. Who asserted, “I have been summoned by the tribunes of the plebs to share in the citizenship,” when
leading 10,000 men towards Rome, defeated and killed Marius’ nephew Rutilius Lupus, and was killed by
Metellus Pius while leading the Marsi?
(Q.) POPPAEDIUS SILO

B1: What city, which may or may not be the same one where a battle took place in the Samnite Wars,
served as the second Italian capital after the fall of Corfinium?
BOVIANUM (VETUS)
B2: What city, initially founded to guard against the Pentri tribe, became the third Italian capital after the
fall of Bovianum Vetus?
AESERNIA
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
9. "Let the pious and godly Christian Epigrams take precedence even if the pagans are displeased," is the
preface to what large work, compiled in the 10th century A.D. by Constantine Cephalas that is arranged in
15 books and covers over 1,500 years of writing with over 4,000 short poems?
GREEK ANTHOLOGY
B1: Epigrams for the tombs of young girls but also various animals in the Greek Anthology were written
by what poetess from Tegea at the end of the 4th century B.C.?
ANYTE
B2: A collection of 60 short poems of what lyric poet, whose wit was new for his time in the 6th century
B.C., was appended to the Greek Anthology?
ANACREON (OF TEOS)
10. A general named Thomas who led a rebellion in 821 A.D. belonged to what ethnolinguistic group,
which overran the Balkans in the 7th century, and still dominate Orthodox-believing countries like
Serbia?
SLAVS
B1: What steppe confederacy, which acted at times as allies or overlords of the Slavs, emulated Attila’s
policy of demanding tribute from the Romans as they menaced the Danube frontier in the 6th and 7th
centuries?
AVARS
B2: What Slavic kingdom, which had accepted Roman Catholicism rather than Orthodoxy, was made a
Byzantine client state by Basil II?
CROATIA
11. After losing a debate to Sthenelaidas, who had to content himself with cutting down olive trees in
Attica during his initial invasion, a stalemate which exemplified most of the first 10 years of the
Peloponnesian war, which was named after him?
ARCHIDAMUS
B1: Name the Spartan and Athenian leaders who brokered a peace which ended the Archidamian War.
PLEISTOANAX (SPARTA) AND NICIAS (ATHENS)
B2: Foreshadowing future disasters, the Athenians under Eurymedon were driven from Sicily by what
Syracusan leader during the Archidamian war?
HERMOCRATES

12. What name is shared between a judge in Vergil's 3rd Eclogue who is described as "grammaticus ante
litteram" and a man who was admired for his verbal facility but condemned for his vicious character to
the point that he was not entrusted with boys?
PALAEMON
B1: What somewhat contemporary of Remmius Palaemon also seemed to ride the Vergil hype train and
wrote a Contrā Obtrectātōrēs Vergiliī?
ASCONIUS PEDIANUS
B2: What is the English for the "epithet" Remmius Palaemon conferred upon Varro Reatinus?
PIG
13. Creepily described as having a “mouth designed for a kiss” by the Historia Augusta despite being 9
years old when he died, what emperor was killed at the town of Zeugma fleeing the men who killed his
father Macrinus?
DIADUMENIANUS
B1: Macrinus, a renowned jurist, likely extended a discount of 50% off representation for non-violent
felonies to the residents of his hometown, Caesarea, in which province?
MAURETANIA
B2: Macrinus gained his throne after what imperial bodyguard slew Caracalla?
(JULIUS) MARTIALIS
————————————————— [SCORE CHECK] —————————————————
14. In Shakespeare's Hamlet, Hamlet draws a mythological comparison between his dead father and new
father Claudius to the Titan Hyperion and what sort of creature? One was killed by Argus Panoptes when
they tried to steal his cattle and another gave their name to a tributary of the Meander that was formed
upon their death by the tears of their woodland friends?
SATYR
B1: In Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream, Oberon and Titiana expound quite profusely about the
king of Athens, Theseus. Oberon, while giving his piece, talks about how Theseus abandoned Ariadne for
what daughter of Panopeus?
AEGLE
B2: Finally, in Shakespeare's Henry VI Part I, Lucy tells us that what animal will make France "afeard"?
According to Herodotus, they would live for 500 years and when strong enough, while young, they would
carry their dead parent's body to a temple in Egypt where priests would burn the body?
PHOENIX
————————————————— [FINAL SCORE CHECK] ——————————————

