2011 BLS Certamen—Intermediate Level
1. ​Name the only emperor of the Julio-Claudian dynasty who had no Julian blood.
Tiberius
B1: Which of the parents of the emperor Caligula contributed his Julian blood?
Germanicus​ / ​Agrippina the Elder (Augustus’ Granddaughter)---Yes, he gets it
from both sides…..whoops!
B2: Which of the parents of the emperor Claudius contributed his Julian blood?
Antiona (minor) (Daughter of Octavia)
2. What do the following verbs have in common? i​ mmineo, pareo, invideo,
parco​.
They take Dative objects
B1: Besides the fact that they are deponent verbs, what do the following have in
common: p
​ otior, vescor, fungor​. ​They take Ablative objects
B2: What do the following adjectives have in common? ​solus, uter, anus​.
They have –ius in the Genitive and –i in the dative
3. What daughter of King Minos did Theseus abandon on the island Naxos?
Ariadne
B1:​ ​Why had Theseus agreed to take her upon his ship?
She helped him escape from the Labyrinth
B2:​ ​What god found Ariadne stranded on Naxos and married her? ​Dionysus
4. Differentiate in meaning between N
​ ix, Nux, a​ nd​ Nox​. ​Nix = Snow, Nux = Nut,
Nox = Night.
B1: Differentiate in meaning between d
​ escendo a​ nd​ discedo​. ​Descendo = climb
down, Discedo = leave or depart
B2: Differentiate in meaning between i​ nter​ and ​iter​. ​Inter = between, iter =
journey
5. ​After a difficult and costly siege lasting eight months, what city, perched on a rocky
plateau, was finally captured by Hannibal in 219 BC? ​Saguntum
B1: The siege of Saguntum was the cause of what war? ​Second Punic War
B2: According to the Romans, the siege of Saguntum violated what treaty of 226 BC?
The Ebro (River) Treaty
6. Excluding its compounds, give a synonym for the verb ​rogo, rogare​.
Peto/Posco/Quaero
B1: Excluding its compounds, give a synonym for the verb ​muto, mutare​.
Verto/Converto/Novo
B2: Excluding all compounds, give a synonym for the verb ​tempto, temptare​.
Conor

7. Who, guided by a lighthouse, swam the Hellespont nightly in order to reach
the town of Sestus and his lover Hero?
Leander
B1: Leander drowned on his way to see Hero. Why was he unable to find shore?
It was dark and there was a storm
B2:​ ​What was Hero’s reaction when she discovered Leander’s corpse?
Committed suicide
8. Translate this sentence into Latin: “The woman, whom you have seen, will be
the wife of the emperor.” ​Femina, quam vidisti/vidistis, erit uxor imperatoris.
B1: Translate this phrase into Latin: “Two bodies.” ​Duo Corpora
B2: Translate this phrase into Latin: “Two hundred animals.” ​Ducenta Animalia
9. What three animals were sacrificed during the Suovetauralia? ​Pig, Sheep,
Bull
B1: During what festival did boys assume the t​ oga virilis​? ​Liberalia
B2: During what festival were roles of masters and slaves somewhat reversed?
Saturnalia
10. Thank you for listening to WROM—The best in popular music in Latin! What
modern song might the Romans have called “Fabula Amoris”? ​Love Story
B1: What modern song might the Romans have called “Amor Malus”? ​Bad
Romance (Lady Gaga)
B2: What modern song might the Romans have called “Diutissime”? ​For the
Longest Time (Billy Joel).
11. ​Who purified Jason and Medea for the murder of her brother Apsyrtus? ​Circe
B1: For whose murder were Jason and Medea driven out of Iolcus? ​Pelias
B2: Name the father and daughter whom Medea murdered in Corinth.
Creon and Glauce/Creusa
12. When recognized by a spotter, perform the following action: Surge et clama
Anglice “Iace eum ex fenestra!” ​Student rises and shouts: “Throw him out the
window!”
B1: Surgite et date amplexum vestro duci. ​Team rises and gives their captain a
hug.
B2: Surgite et currite ad ianuam quam celerrime. ​Students rise and run to the
door.

