2011 CHAMPIONS’ LEAGUE OF CERTAMEN
AT YALE UNIVERSITY
ADVANCED DIVISION
ROUND TWO

Tossup1. What enemy of Rome was defeated at the Catalaunian Plains in 451
A.D. by Flavius Aetius?
Atilla
Bonus1. Who ruled the Roman empire in the west when this battle
occurred?
Valentenian III
Bonus2. How many years after Catalaunian Plains did the western
Roman empire fall? 25 years
Tossup2. What female begged the gods to forever connect her body with her
lover's, a phenomenon that created the Hermaphroditus ?
Salmacis
Bonus1. What jealous lover followed her boyfriend into the woods
while he was hunting, only to be accidentally killed by him a few
moments later?
Procris
Bonus2. What brother-sister pair in Ovid's Metamorphoses would have
committed incest had the girl gotten her way? Caunis and Byblis
Tossup3. Give the principal parts and meaning of the Latin verb tendō.
tendō, tendere, tetendī, tentus tēnsus – to stretch, strive, aim
Bonus1. Give the principal parts and meaning of the Latin verb tundō.
tundō, tundere, tutudī, tūnsus tūsus – to beat, pound,
thump
Bonus2. Give the meaning of the impersonal Latin verb taedet. it
wearies, it irks, it is annoying
Tossup4. Casina, Epidicus, Stichus, Pseudolus, Mostellaria, Menaechmi and
Miles Gloriosus are all plays by what Roman playwright?
Plautus
Bonus1. Of those plays, which one involves a haunted house?
Mostellaria
Bonus2. Of those plays, which one involves long-lost twins?
Menaechmi

Tossup5. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Liber ille
est difficilis lectu.” That book is difficult to read
Bonus1. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English:
Liber auxilio erat discipulis.
The book helped/was a help
to the students
Bonus2. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English:
Gladio necatus est Quintus.”
Quintus was killed with a sword
Tossup6. What use of the accusative is found in the following Latin phrase,
caput nectentur ? Accusative of Specification/Greek Accusative
Bonus1. What use of the accusative is found in the following Latin
phrase, Ō mē īnfēlīcem?
Accusative of Exclamation
Bonus2. What use of the accusative is found in the following Latin
phrase, beātam vītam vīvere ?
Cognate Accusative

Tossup7. What early Latin poet used the Saturnian Meter to translate Homer’s
Odyssey into Latin?
Livius Andronicus
Bonus1. Translate the word camena , which is found in the following
line from Andronicus: Virum mihi, camena, insece versutum”
Muse/water-nymph
Bonus2. What was the Latin title of Andronicus’ work? Odyssia
Tossup8. Thrasymedes, Peisistratus, and Antilochus are all sons of what king of
Pylus Nestor
Bonus1. Antilochus died rescuing Nestor from the attack of what savage
foe? Memnon
Bonus2. If you happened to talk to old king Nestor during the Trojan
War, you would probably hear about his exploits as young man, some
of which are quite impressive. While participating in the Calydonian
boar hunt, how did Nestor barely escape being killed by the beast?
He used his spear to vault into a tree.
Tossup9. Give the Latin and the meaning for the abbreviation Q.E.D.
Quod
erat demonstrandum- that which has been demonstrated
Bonus1. Give the Latin and the meaning for the abbreviation Q.E.F.
Quod erat faciendum- that which had to be done
Bonus2. Give the Latin and the meaning for the abbreviation Q.M.
Quaque Mane- Each Morning

Tossup10. Listen to the following passage which I will read twice and answer in
English the question that follows:
Aurēlia magnum dolorem habuit – suum tergum, sua crūra, suōs pedēs
nocuerat. Equus Aurēliae salīre super impedimentum temptāverat et Aurēlia
ceciderat. Equus domum currēbat, itaque necesse erat Aurēliae quīnque mīlia
passuum ambulāre. Nunc Aurēlia, nōn equus, erat īrāta.
Tossup: Why had Aurelia fallen off of her horse? The horse had tried to
jump over an obstacle
Bonus1. Give two things that Aurelia had hurt in her fall. (Two of) her
back, her legs, her feet
Bonus2. How far did Aurelia have to walk because her horse kept on
running home?
5 miles
Tossup11. The Cumaean Sibyl, Creusa, Cyrene, and Hyacinthus were all sought
after by which Olympian deity?
Apollo
Bonus1. Which goddess did Apollo unsuccessfully attempt to seduce?
Hestia
Bonus2. Which of Apollo’s epithets means Wolf-God or Light-God?
Lyceius
Tossup12. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Aureum eī
dētrāxit amiculum. He/she took his golden cloak
Bonus1. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Suīs
salūtī fuit.
He/she was the safety of his/her men
Bonus2. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English:
Locum castrīs dēligit
He/she chose a site (location) for camp
Tossup13. What man co-sponsored the Lex Licinia Sextia of 366 B.C., and became
the first plebeian consul in 366 B.C.?
Lucius Sextius
Bonus1. Who was the first plebeian dictator, appointed in 356 B.C.?
Gaius Marcius Rutilus
Bonus2. Marcius Rutilus also became the first plebeian to hold what
office in 351 B.C.?
Censor
Tossup14. What poet was born on a farm in Venusia and later received a Sabine
farm from the Emperor Augustus?
Horace
Bonus1. What general did Horace fight under during the Battle of
Philippi?
Brutus
Bonus2. What work did Horace compose in 17 BC for the
commissioning of the Ludi Saeculares?
Carmen Saeculare

Tossup15. What English derivative of the Latin noun meaning peace means to
yield or concede to the belligerent demands of group in a conciliatory effort.
Appease
Bonus1. From what other Latin verb do we derive the word appeal?
Appellō
Bonus2. From yet another Latin verb, we derive the word appendage.
Give that verb.
Pendeō
Tossup16. What king of Calydon was awarded the gift of wine by Dionysus in
return for his hospitality?
Oeneus
Bonus1. Name the wife of Oeneus who slept with Dionysus when her
husband, realizing the god’s interest in his wife, prudently made up an
excuse to get out of town?
Althaea
Bonus2. What future wife of Heracle was the child of this union?
Deianeira
Tossup17. Which Macedonian ruler entered into a compact of mutual assistance
with Hannibal in 215 BC? Philip V
Bonus1. Who was the Roman admiral sent to deal with Philip V?
(Valerius) Laevinus
Bonus2. What king of Asia Minor allied himself with Laevinus against
Philip V?
Attalus I
Tossup18. Give the 3rd person singular pluperfect active subjunctive of the verb
corripio.
Corripuissent
Bonus1. Make that passive. Correpti Essent
Bonus2. Make that present. Corripiant
Tossup19. What historian, across two works, covers the periods from the death
of Augustus to the death of Nero? (Gaius/Publius Cornelius) Tacitus
Bonus1. Give the Latin titles of both of Tacitus’ major works of history.
Annālēs, Historiae
Bonus2. What was the Latin title of the treatise that Tacitus set around
75 A.D. as a discussion among four distinguished men on oratory and
its decline due to the changing conditions and the role of an orator in
public life from the Republic to the empire?
Dialogus dē
Ōrātōribus

Tossup20. Give the Latin term for the boy who carries the utensils necessary for
making the sacrificial offering during the cōnfārreātiō. Camillus
Bonus1. In order to be a camillus, the boy must fulfill the condition of
patrīmus et mātrīmus. What does this mean? Both parents must
be alive at the time of the ceremony
Bonus2. What Latin term refers to the covered basket in which the
utensils are carried? Cumera

2011 CHAMPIONS’ LEAGUE OF CERTAMEN
AT YALE UNIVERSITY
ADVANCED DIVISION
ROUND 3
1. What pair of audacious brothers stacked two mountains on top of Mount Olympus in order to
storm heaven and overthrow the gods?
OTUS AND EPHIALTES / THE ALOADS
B1 Name the two mountains they stacked on top of Olympus.
OSSA AND PELION
B2 Name either the mother or father of Otus and Ephialtes.
IPHIMEDIA or ALOEUS
2. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: “Romani bellum gerere volunt
Galliae vincendae causa.”
THE ROMANS WANT TO WAGE WAR (IN ORDER) TO CONQUER GAUL
B1 Translate “in order to conquer Gaul” using a gerundive in the accusative case.
AD GALLIAM VINCENDAM
B2 Translate “in order to conquer Gaul” using a gerund.
GALLIAM VINCENDI CAUSA/GRATIA
3. What city was the Roman King Tullus Hostilius most famous for defeating in battle?
ALBA LONGA
B1 What God did Tullus dishonor, leading to his death?
JUPITER (ELICIUS)
B2 How did he die?
A LIGHTNING BOLT STRUCK HIS HOUSE (prompt for a more specific answer if they
say “his house was set on fire”)
4. Name the work of Latin literature that contains the following lines, which I will read as
prose. “Et iam Fama volans, tanti praenuntia luctus, Evandrum Evandrique domos et
moenia replete, quae modo victorem Latio Pallanta ferebat.”
THE AENEID
B1 In Book 11 of the Aeneid, what Etruscan tyrant kills Pallas?
MEZENTIUS
B2 What son of Mezentius does Aeneas kill in revenge?
LAUSUS
5. Give the Latin verb and its meaning from which we derive “kitchen”.
COQUO - COOK
B1 Which fruit also gets its name from coquo?
APRICOT
B2 What clay-like material, used in building and sculpture, also derives its name from
coquo?
TERRA COTTA

6. Against what emperor did Avidius Cassius rebel in 169 AD?
MARCUS AURELIUS
B1 What elusive desert city had Avidius Cassius captured from the Parthians?
CTESIPHON
B2 Name two other emperors or generals who captured Ctesiphon at some point during the
empire.
GALERIUS/TRAJAN/SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS
7. To which mythological group do all of the following belong: Sterope, Celaeno, Taygete,
Electra, and Maia?
PLEIADES
B3 Which seer used his knowledge of animal speech to devise a method for revising King
Minos’ dead son?
POLYEIDUS
B4 Which seer stole the cattle of King Phylacus in order to help his brother win Pero, the
daughter of Neleus, as his wife?
MELAMPUS
8. Which of these adjectives represents the darkest color: flavus, roseus, ater, viridis?
ATER
B1 Which of these animals is most likely to be described as flavus? Balaena, Avis, Leo,
Lepus
LEO
B2 Which of these adjectives is LEAST likely to describe the leo? Ferox, mortifer,
periculosus, innocuus.
INNOCUUS
9. What silver age Roman historian chronicled abuses of imperial power in his Annales and
Historiae?
(PUBLIUS/GAIUS CORNELIUS) TACITUS
B1 Tacitus also wrote a biography of his father-in-law. Name this man.
(GNAEUS JULIUS) AGRICOLA
B2 What emperor’s death marks the beginning of the Annales?
AUGUSTUS
10. What compound of do, dare is a synonym of amitto?
B1 What English word deriving from perdo means “damnation”?
B2 What compound of do, dare means “to build” or “to found”?

PERDO
PERDITION
CONDO

11. What helmsman of Aeneas’ flagship washed overboard and drowned off the coast of Italy?
PALINURUS
B1 What Roman god induced Palinurus to fall asleep and overboard?
SOMNUS

B2 What marooned sailor from Odysseus’ crew was rescued by Aeneas and brough to Italy?
ACHAEMENIDES
12. Give a Latin word for uncle.
PATRUUS or AVUNCULUS
B1 Give the other word.
(SHOULD GIVE EITHER ONE)
B2 What is the difference in meaning between these two words?
ONE REFERS TO THE UNCLE ON A FATHER’S SIDE, THE OTHER REFERS
TO THE UNCLE ON THE MOTHER’S SIDE
13. Make the phrase “centum milites Romani” genitive.
CENTUM MILITUM ROMANORUM
B1 Now make the phrase “duo pedes” plural.
DUOBUS PEDIBUS
B2 Now make the phrase “fas divinum” ablative.
FAS DIVINO
14. What author from Numidia was accused of seducing the rich widow Pudentilla with charms
and magic?
(LUCIUS) APULEIUS
B1 Give the Latin title of Apuleius’ most famous work.
ASINUS AUREUS
B2 What oratorical work of Apuleius documents his courtroom defense against the charges
of witchcraft against Pudentilla?
APOLOGIA / THE APOLOGY
15. What phrase of legal Latin meaning “alias” or “second self” is literally translated into
English as “another I”?
ALTER EGO
B1 What phrase of legal Latin refers to a writ releasing a prisoner from unlawful detention?
HABEAS CORPUS
B2 Give the idiomatic English translation of the phrase “onus probandi.”
BURDEN OF PROOF (don’t accept “weight” or any other word for “burden”)
16. What poet, despite invoking Venus at the beginning of his work, ends the fourth book of his
didactic, anti-religious work with a digression vigorously denouncing the passion of love?
(TITUS) LUCRETIUS (CARUS)
B1 Although little was known with any certainty about the poet’s life, we do know that he
was read by other Latin writers, of whom several were admirers. What poet, who
coincidentally assumed the toga virilis on the day of Lucretius, said about him: “felix qui
potuit rerum cognoscere causas”?
(PUBLIUS) VERGILIUS (MARO)
B2 What contemporary and putative publisher of Lucretius’ De Rerum Natura wrote the
following evaluation of the poem in a letter to his brother? Lucretii poemata…ita sunt
multis luminibus ingenii, multae tamen artis.

(MARCUS TULLIUS) CICERO
17. What dependent use of the subjunctive is found in the following sentence: “Nemo est quin
sciat gloriam tuam.”
RELATIVE CLAUSE OF CHARACTERISTIC
B1 What use of the subjunctive can be found in this sentence: “Plura ne dicam tuae me
lacrimae impediunt.”
(SUBJUNCTIVE WITH) VERBS OF HINDERING
B2 What use of the subjunctive can be found in the sentence: “Id difficile non est, cum
tantum equitatu valeamus.”
CUM CAUSAL
18. Who correctly interpreted but did not reveal the meaning of the oracular pronouncement that
Aegeus should not “un-cork his wineskin” until he returned home to Athens?
PITTHEUS
B1 Where was Pittheus king?
TROEZEN
B2 What Corinthian hero had briefly courted Pittheus’ daughter Aethra before Aegeus’ visit
to Troezen?
BELLEROPHON
19. While campaigning for the consulship of 63 BC, what plebeian leader promised a general
cancellation of debts?
(LUCIUS SERGIUS) CATILINA / CATILINE
B1 What colleague did he run with?
(GAIUS ANTONIUS) HYBRIDA
B2 What Celtic tribe gave Cicero valuable information on the Catilinarian Conspiracy?
63 BC
20. Listen to the following passage, which I will read twice. Then answer the question that
follows, in ENGLISH. “Olim erat puella quae crines rubros habuit. Quattuor annos
puellae magister multos iocos de ea narraverat. Tandem puella a Florida abiit ut in
collegio Yalensi multum disceret. Putavit se iocis magistri prioris liberatum iri.
Errabat.” Tossup: What physical description of the young woman do we get in the first
sentence of this passage?
SHE HAS RED HAIR
B1 What had the poor young woman’s teacher done to her for four years?
TOLD (MANY) JOKES ABOUT HER
B2 What did the disillusioned young woman mistakenly think would happen by moving to
New Haven?
THAT THE JOKES WOULD STOP.

2011 CHAMPIONS’ LEAGUE OF CERTAMEN
AT YALE UNIVERSITY
ADVANCED DIVISION
SEMIFINAL ROUND

Tossup1. In Homer's Iliad, what three Greeks were sent in an attempt to bring
Achilles back to the battlefield?
Telamonian (Greater) Ajax, Phoenix,
Odysseus
Bonus1. Who had proposed this idea to Agamemnon?
Nestor
Bonus2. Which member of the embassy was asked to stay the night by
Achilles?
Phoenix
Tossup2. What university has the motto perstāre et praestāre? New York
University
Bonus1. What university has the motto sapientia et doctrīna?
Fordham University
Bonus2. What university has the motto nōn sibi, sed suīs?
Tulane University
Tossup3. Which of the following verbs is not of the same declension as the rest?
Tango, Festino, Carpo, Plango
Festino
Bonus1. Using the verb carpo, say in Latin, let them seize the day .
Carpant diem
Bonus2. Change carpant diem to the imperfect. Carperent diem
Tossup4. In what speech of 70 BC did Cicero prosecute the former governor of
Sicily on charges of corruption and extortion?
In Verrem
Bonus1. In what speech of 62 BC did Cicero defend the status of a Greek
poet whose citizenship had been impugned?
Pro Archia
Bonus2. In what speech of 52 BC does Cicero argue that the murder of
Clodius was done in self-defense? Pro Milone

Tossup5. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Nemo est
quin vinum amet.”
There is no one who doesn’t/wouldn’t love
wine
Bonus1. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Puto
Publium esse hominem qui dicat.”
I think that Publius
is the man who is speaking
Bonus2. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English:
Misit Caesar milites qui auxilium peteret.” Caesar sent
soldiers to seek aid
Tossup6. Which member of the Seven Against Thebes single handedly killed all
but one of the group of 50 sent to ambush him?
Tydeus
Bonus1. Which of his companions was rumored to be the child of
Atalanta?
Parthenopaeus
Bonus2. What fellow comrade was the father of Aegialeus, the only
member of the Epigoni to perish on the mission? Adrastus
Tossup7. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Utinam
vātēs essem. Would that I were a prophet/bard
Bonus1. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English:
Oderint dum metuant.
Let them hate so long as they
fear
Bonus2. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Quid
agam, iūdicēs?
What am I to do, O judges

Tossup8. Fabricius, a Roman ambassador, negotiated with Cineas, an agent of
what king of Epirus?
Pyrrhus
Bonus1. What was the last battle of the Pyrrhic war?
Beneventum
(Maleventum)
Bonus2. What Roman commander led the forces at Beneventum?
Curius Denatus
Tossup9. What author famously recounts hearing a child in a garden say tolle,
lege, leading him to abandon Manichaeism and convert to Christianity?
Augustine
Bonus1. Where was Augustine bishop?
Hippo
Bonus2. What 22 book work of Augustine is one of his most famous and
refutes the charge that Christianity caused the fall of Rome?
De
Civitate Dei/The City of God

Tossup10. The English words rail, alert, source, escort, surge, and direction all
come from what 3rd conjugation Latin verb?
Regō
Bonus1. Which one of the following words is also a derivative of regō:
adroit, irrigation, ravine, rescue? Adroit
Bonus2. What other derivative of regō means unsalvageable, especially
with regards to behavior ?
Incorrigible
Tossup11. Who was proclaimed emperor by the armies of the Rhine under the
leadership of Valens in January 3, 69 AD?
Vitellius
Bonus1. Who led the Danubian army that deposed Vitellius?
Antonius Primus
Bonus2. What happened when Vitellius attempted to escape from
Rome? He was lynched
Tossup12. Put the following events in correct chronological order as they appear
in the Odyssey: the Underworld, the Lotus-Eaters, Aeolus, and the Phaeacians.
Lotus Eaters, Aeolus, Underworld, Phaeacians
Bonus1. Whose shade does Odysseus first encounter in the
Underworld? Elpenor’s
Bonus2. How had Elpenor died?
(Drunkenly) fell off (Circe’s)
roof
Tossup13. Differentiate in meaning between the Latin nouns fōns and frōns.
fōns – fountain, spring; frōns – forehead
Bonus1. Differentiate in meaning between the Latin nouns pellis and
pīlum. pellis – skin, hide; pīlum – spear
Bonus2. Differentiate in meaning between the Latin nouns āra and
arātrum.
Altar and Plow
Tossup14. Whose satires did Horace use as a model for his own Sermones?
Lucilius’
Bonus1. What was the primary meter of Lucilius’ Sermones?
Dactylic Hexameter
Bonus2. To what Roman statement’s literary circle did Lucilius belong?
(Publius Cornelius) Scipio Aemlianus’

Tossup15. What Latin legal term is used to describe something not based on
prior study, and literally means from what comes before?
A Priori
Bonus1. What is the opposite of ā priōrī? A Posteriori
Bonus2. What does the phrase ā tergō mean?
From behind/from
the back
Tossup16. What enemy did Rome defeat at Magnesia in 189 B.C.?
Antiochus III (prompt on Selucids)
Bonus1. Where had the Romans defeated Antiochus to drive him out of
Greece in 191 B.C.? Thermopylae
Bonus2. What peace ended the conflict with Antiochus by forcing him to
cede all territory west of Mt. Taurus, among other things?
Peace
of Apamea
Tossup17. Listen to the following passage and answer in Latin the question that
follows:
Romae antīquae, hominēs cōtīdie ad thermās īērunt. Ibi poterant in piscīnīs sē
lavāre, in palaestrā exercēre, in unctoriō fricārī, et in laconicō relaxāre.
Utinam etiam hōdie in patriā nostrā habērēmus!
Tossup: Quid Rōmānus in piscīnīs facere poterat?
Sē lavāre
Bonus1. Quotiēns hominēs ad thermās iērunt?
Cōtīdie
Bonus2. Ubi thermās habēre placēret?
In patriā nostrā
Tossup18. As Telemachus was arriving at Sparta at the beginning of Book IV of
the Odyssey, whom did Menelaus send to Pythia to marry Neoptolemus?
Hermione
Bonus1. To what other man was Hermione engaged?
Orestes
Bonus2. Which of Nestor’s sons was Telemachus’ primary travel
companion as he reached Sparta? Peisistratus

Tossup19. What Latin author wrote the following poem?
Nōn amō tē, Sabidī, nec possum dīcere quārē:
hoc tantum possum dīcere, nōn amō tē.
(Marcus Valerius) Martialis / Martial
Bonus1. What was the Latin title of Martial’s first known work, which
was published in 80 A.D.? Liber Spectaculorum
Bonus2. What was the title of Martial’s collection of couplets to
accompany gifts for guests during Saturnalia?
Xenia

Tossup20. What use of the Subjunctive is found in the following Latin sentence:
Hōs lātrōnēs interficiāmus ?
Hortatory/Jussive Subjunctive
Bonus1. What use of the Subjunctive is found in the following Latin
sentence: Utinam Clōdius vīveret ?
Optative
Subjunctive
Bonus2. What use of the Subjunctive is found in the following Latin
sentence: Forsitan quaerātis quī iste terror sit ?
Potential
Subjunctive

2011 CHAMPIONS’ LEAGUE OF CERTAMEN
AT YALE UNIVERSITY
ADVANCED DIVISION
FINAL ROUND
Tossup1. What Silver Age Latin author mercilessly mocks the Emperor Claudius in his
Menippean Satire Apocolocyntosis?
Seneca the Younger
Bonus1. What does Apocolocyntosis mean?
Pumpkinification/being made into a pumpkin
Bonus2. What distinguished Menippean satire?
A mixture of prose and verse
Tossup2. If you were walking down the street in Ancient Rome and you encountered a
man, garbed in purple, with his face painted red, whom would you be looking at?
A victorious general
Bonus1. What childhood object would be a part of the general’s costume?
His bulla
Bonus2. What temple was the final destination of a triumphal procession?
Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus/Capitolinus/Temple of
Jupiter Feretrius
Tossup3. For the verb facio , give the 3rd person plural present passive subjunctive.
Fiant
Bonus1. Make fiant imperfect.
Facerentur
Bonus2. Give the future infinitive of fio.
Factum iri
Tossup4. Many people feel a slight distrust towards their in-laws, but few are so bold
as to push them into a bed of burning coals and wood. What man in classical
mythology did just that and became the first kin-slayer ever?
Ixion
Bonus1. Name Ixion's sister, after whose death their father Phlegyas ignited
her ex-lover's temple.
Coronis
Bonus2. Going with the theme of horrible firsts in classical mythology, what
son of Poseidon raped Ares' daughter Alcippe, thus prompting Ares to kill
him and be charged on the Areopagus in the first ever murder trial?
Hallirhothius
Tossup5. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Oderint
Caesarem dum dictatorem esse confiteantur. Let them fear Caesar so long as
they acknowledge/admit/concede that he is dictator
Bonus1. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Quaesivit
nuntius cur Caesar abesset.
The messenger asked why Caesar was
absent

Bonus2. Translate the following sentence from Latin into English: Accidit ut
pluvat.
It happens/comes about/occurs that it is raining
Tossup6. In what year were Gordian I; Gordian II; Gordian III; Balbinus; Pupienus;
Maximinius emperors of Rome?
238 A.D.
Bonus1. Put these emperors in order.
Maximinius, Gordian I, Gordian
II, Pupienus,Balbinus, Gordian III.
Bonus2. Which emperors ruled jointly?
Pupienus & Balbinus
Tossup7. In Book XIV of Homer’s Iliad, Hera appeals to two deities to help her draw
Zeus’s attention away from the fighting so that can she can bring aid to the Greeks.
Name both of these deities.
Aphrodite and Hypnos
Bonus1. What does Aphrodite present to Hera?
Her girdle
Bonus2. As you probably could have guessed, Hypnos overcomes Zeus with
sleep. However, he was, at first, quite hesitant to help Hera and was fearful of
Zeus’ wrath but Hera was able to persuade him by promising the hand of
what minor Grace in marriage?
Pasithea
Tossup8. Which of the following nouns, if any, does not belong because of GENDER:
virtūs, legiō, laus, nīdus?
Nīdus
Bonus1. What is the meaning of the Latin noun nīdus? nest
Bonus2. Nests are of course found in trees, and most tree names in Latin are
feminine, as in the noun quercus meaning oak tree. What other word, a
neuter 3rd declension word, can be used in Latin to mean oak tree?
Robur
Tossup9. Whose account of the Second Punic War in over twelve thousand hexameter
verses is considered the longest and worst epic of Latin literature?
Silius
Italicus’
Bonus1. Whose letter contains an obituary of Silius Italicus, who died in 101
A.D., and is the chief source for his contemporary’s life? Pliny the
Younger’s
Bonus2. How did Silius Italicus die?
He starved himself/suicide
Tossup10. Identify the use of the Genitive Case found in the following sentence: Non
video te improbitatis absolutum esse, sed illos caedis damnatos esse.
Charge/penalty
Bonus1. Identify the use of the Genitive Case found in the following sentence
from the Aeneid: nec me meminisse pigebit Elissae, dum memor ipse mei.
Verbs of Remembering (prompt on special verbs)
Bonus2. Identify the use of the Genitive Case found in the following phrases:
vacation muneris, fuga malorum, and caritas tui.
Objective
Genitive

Tossup11. Publilius Syrus and Decimus Laberius both wrote in what Roman genre?
Mime/Maxims
Bonus1. Who famously held a contest between the two?
Julius Caesar
Bonus2. What genre of Roman satire, an early precursor of Roman comedy,
was satirical, bawdy, and invective, and used mainly at weddings and
festivals?
Fescennine Verse
Tossup12. Listen to the following passage which I will read twice and answer in English
the question that follows:
Omnēs sciunt duo dē universitāte Yalēnsī: prīmum, hanc esse universitātem bonam, et
secundum, adesse sociētātēs secrētās. Sociētās secrēta nōtissima est nōmine
Cerebrum et Ossa. Ut rumor nōbīs narrat, hominēs huius sociētātis nocte conveniunt,
nocte secrēta faciunt. Eīs est plūs auctōritātis. Ego sum homō huius sociētātis? Sī
vōbīs hoc dīcam, necesse erit mihi vōs interficere. (Repeat.)
The question: Name one of the two things everyone knows about Yale.
It’s a
good school; there are secret societies
Bonus1. According to rumor, what do the Bonesmen do by night?
Meet/do secret things
Bonus2. Translate or paraphrase the last sentence of the passage to say what I
would tell you if you asked if I was a Bonesman. If I tell you, I’ll have to kill
you
Tossup13. For the patronage of what city did Briareus serve as an arbitrator?
Corinth
Bonus1. Which two deities were disputing over the patronage of Corinth?
Poseidon and Helius
Bonus2. How did Briareus solve the dispute?
He awarded the citadel
(of Acrocorinth) to Helius and the isthmus to Poseidon.
Tossup14. Which emperor opened the ranks of the Praetorian Guards to provincials?
Septimius Severus
Bonus1. In what year did Septimius Severus decisively defeat his rival
Pescennius Niger? 194 AD
Bonus2. Where was this decisive battle fought?
Issus
Tossup15. What use of the Accusative is illustrated in the following sentence: Caesar
Germānōs flūmen trāicit ?
Double Accusative (Accusative of Secondary
Object)
Bonus1. What use of the Accusative is illustrated in the following sentence:
Cicerōnem cōnsulem creāre ?
Predicate Accusative
Bonus2. What use of the Accusative is illustrated in the following phrase:
meam vicem ?
Adverbial Accusative

Tossup16. What 12 book work dedicated to Victorious Marcellus was an educational
treatise on literary criticism, the technical aspects of style, and the training of the
orator?
Institutio Oratoria
Bonus1. Who was the author of the Institutio Oratoria? Quintilian
Bonus2. What was Quintilian’s original hometown?
Calagurris
Tossup17. From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive the English adjective
tasty?
Tango, to touch
Bonus1. From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive the English
word tissue?
Texo, to weave
Bonus2. From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive the English
word protégé?
Tego, to cover
Tossup18. Using utinam and a form of queo, translate into Latin, would that I could live
twice.
Utinam queam/quirem bis vivere
Bonus1. Nathan Hale, a famous Yale alumnus and America’s first spy is famous
for saying I only regret that I have but one life to give for my country. Say in
Latin, would that he had died twice for his country
Utinam bis
mortuus esset pro patria
Bonus2. Translate into Latin, many prefer living to dying.
Multi malunt
vivere quam mori
Tossup19. What second-century emperor tried to increase his popularity by granting a
week of gladiatorial games and cancelling 900 million sesterces worth of debt to the
state after the execution of four Roman generals who plotted against him, including
Lusius Quietus?
Hadrian
Bonus1. Where had Quietus served as lē gā tus under Trajan?
Judea
Bonus2. To what Praetorian prefect did Hadrian delegate the responsibility of
the execution of the Four Consulars ?
(Caelius) Attianus
Tossup20. What son of Haemon was banned from his native Aetolia for killing his
brother and while taking refuge in Elis became the guide of the Heraclids during
their invasion of the Peloponnesus?
Oxylus
Bonus1. What prophecy led the Heraclids to pick Oxylus as their guide?
They were told that their guide should be a three-eyed one.
Bonus2. How did Oxylus fulfill the criterion of that prophecy?
He rode a
one-eyed horse (and he himself had two eyes)

