Yale Certamen 2020
Written by Kyle Jain, Dante Minutillo, Gabe Molina, Nikhil Ranjan, Henry Schott, and Matt Thomas.
Edited by Dante Minutillo, Nikhil Ranjan, and Matt Thomas.

Agon – Preliminary Round 1
1. What student of Isaeus famously placed pebbles in his mouth to help him overcome his speech
impediment and become the greatest Athenian orator?
DEMOSTHENES
B1: What series of speeches did Demosthenes deliver against the father of Alexander the Great?
PHILIPPICS
B2: What other Attic orator was so careful with his style that he is said to have spent 10 years writing
his Panegyricus, a speech glorifying Greek culture and encouraging the Greeks to unite against Persia?
ISOCRATES
2. Translate from English into the best Attic Greek: “She brings a beautiful victory.”
καλὴν νίκην φέρει.
B1: Make that sentence plural, so that it means “They bring beautiful victories.”
καλὰς νίκας φέρουσι(ν).
B2: Now translate this sentence into the best Attic Greek: “There was victory in the battle.”
νίκη ἦν ἐν τῇ μάχῃ.
3. Which of the following five mythological characters did not complete a trip to and from the
Underworld: Odysseus, Psyche, Aeneas, Jason, Orpheus?
JASON
B1: Though not the Underworld, from what dangerous kingdom along the Black Sea did Jason escape?
COLCHIS
B2: Which of the other figures from the toss-up does Aeneas spot while in the Underworld?
ORPHEUS
4. Differentiate in meaning between the Greek adjectives μακρός and μικρός.
BIG/GREAT and SMALL (RESPECTIVELY)
B1: Now differentiate in meaning between the Greek nouns δίκη and τιμή.
JUSTICE and HONOR (RESPECTIVELY)
B2: Give an antonym of the Greek word θάνατος.
βίος / ἀθανασία
5. After besieging Tyre and Gaza, who set the Persian king Darius III to flight at the battle of Gaugamela
in 331 B.C., cementing his status as one of the greatest generals in world history?
ALEXANDER THE GREAT
B1: After the battle of the Hydaspes in 326 B.C., Alexander the Great established a city on the right side
of the Hydaspes named after which horse of his?
BUCEPHALUS
B2: Eventually, Alexander the Great ended up passing due to disease on the 28th of Daisios of what
year?
323 B.C.
6. Tied to an olive tree in the groves at Mycenae, what maiden was watched over day and night by the
many-eyed giant Argus?
IO

B1: After being freed from Argus’ watch, Io crossed paths with what Titan, who foretold the lengthy
and tortuous wanderings she would endure?
PROMETHEUS
B2: Near what river did Io eventually settle down and bear a son to Zeus?
NILE
7. What three cases can prepositions take in Greek?
ACCUSATIVE, DATIVE, GENITIVE
B1: The prepositions πρός and παρά, among others, involve location and can take all three cases above.
What use of the accusative case can be found with these prepositions?
PLACE TOWARDS WHICH/MOTION TOWARDS
B2: What use of the genitive case can be found following these same prepositions?
PLACE FROM WHICH/SEPARATION
8. A group that met every month between the bridge of Babyka and the stream of Knakion called the
Apella, 5 officials corresponding to the number of demes called ephors, and a dual kingship were all
characteristics of the political nature of what war-like city?
SPARTA
B1: What council of 30 in Sparta was composed of 28 men over the age of 60 and the 2 kings?
GEROUSIA
B2: Which legendary lawgiver was said to have framed the Spartan institutions and enacted the Spartan
laws around 885 B.C.E.?
LYCURGUS
9. What author describes a hawk telling a nightingale that might makes right before exhorting his brother
Perses to act justly and do the honest work of farming in his didactic epic Works and Days?
HESIOD
B1: In the opening sections of the Works and Days, after describing Prometheus’s theft of fire, Hesiod
tells the story of what mythological woman?
PANDORA
B2: What was Hesiod’s profession before he was visited by the Muses and inspired to write poetry?
SHEPHERD
10. What is the meaning of the Greek root common to the following words: politics, cosmopolitan,
metropolis, police?
CITY
B1: A monotechnic is defined as “an institution wherein a single subject is taught.” From what two
Greek words, with what meanings, do we derive “monotechnic”?
μόνος - ONLY / ALONE and τέχνη - ART / SKILL / CRAFT
B2: What is the meaning of the Greek root common to these words: devil, embolus, ball, parabola?
THROW
11. For the Greek verb γράφω, give the 2nd person plural present active indicative.
γράφετε
B1: Now change the form γράφετε to the imperative.
γράφετε
B2: Give the same form for the verb εἰμί.
ἐστέ
12. What mythological hero is the protagonist of a 4-book Alexandrian epic by the man who succeeded
Eratosthenes as head of the Alexandrian Library, Apollonius of Rhodes?
JASON

B1: What mythological heroine is the subject of an epyllion by Colluthus and was supposedly slandered
by Stesichorus?
HELEN
B2: What famous sophist from Leontini wrote an Encomium of Helen in a highly literary and mannered
style?
GORGIAS
13. According to its etymology, what can someone see if they have the epithet Panoptes?
EVERYTHING/ALL
B1: Besides epithets, many Greek names can be roughly translated by themselves. For example, the
Byzantine author Heliodorus's name suggests he was a gift from what?
THE SUN
B2: At birth, Plato's given name was allegedly Aristocles. The “-cles” part of his name is related to the
verb καλέω, which means “to call.” Based on this etymology, what kind of reputation was the young
child supposed to have?
THE BEST
14. Seeing a snake with a blood-red back glide out from beneath an altar and devour a sparrow along with
its eight fledglings, who immediately interpreted this omen and predicted the outcome of the Trojan War
for the Greek forces?
CALCHAS
B1: At what port-town in Boeotia did this event take place?
AULIS
B2: What deity turned the snake to stone?
ZEUS
15. Which of the following cities, if any, was not located on the Peloponnese: Olympia, Sparta, Delphi,
Epidaurus?
DELPHI
B1: Which of the following cities, if any, was not located in Asia Minor: Halicarnassus, Ancyra,
Smyrna, Miletus?
ALL ARE LOCATED IN ASIA MINOR
B2: Which of the following cities, if any, was not located in Sicily: Acragas, Leontini, Himera,
Tauromenium, Epidamnus?
EPIDAMNUS
16. What Greek verb, related to the noun λόγος, means “to speak”?
λέγω
B1: What Greek verb, related to the adjective μόνος, means “to remain”?
μένω
B2: Livy's history of Rome was condensed by a later author into summaries called periochae. This
noun, roughly meaning “content,” is related to περί and what Greek verb, which means “to have”?
ἔχω
17. What general fate is shared by the mother of Chiron — Philyra — as well as Dryope, Myrrha, and
Cyparissus?
TRANSFORMED INTO TREES
B1: Into what type of tree was Philyra transformed?
LINDEN / LIME
B2: Into what type of tree was Dryope transformed?
LOTUS

18. What work from the 2nd century AD demonstrates that Greeks could boast statesmen and warriors
comparable to those of their Roman masters through a collection of 23 pairs of biographies comparing
figures from Greek and Roman history?
(PLUTARCH’S) PARALLEL LIVES / Βίοι Παράλληλοι
B1: What Latin title is generally given to the large collection of Plutarch’s other writings, which include
Education of Children, How to Study Poetry, and How to Tell a Flatterer from a Friend?
MŌRĀLIA
B2: What was Plutarch’s native city, which he describes as “a small place that would be even smaller if I
did not live there”?
CHAERONEA
19. Translate from Greek to English: “ὁ ἀδελφὸς τοὺς ἵππους λείπει.”
THE BROTHER ABANDONS THE HORSES
B1: Now translate: “χαλεπὰ ἐστι τὰ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἔργα.”
THE MAN’S WORKS/LABORS ARE DIFFICULT
B2: Now translate: “οὐ δίκαιόν ἐστι τὸν πόλεμον φεύγειν.”
IT IS NOT JUST TO FLEE THE WAR
20. The constant obstinance of Cleophon prevented the end of what war, whose final battle saw Lysander
capture 160 Athenian ships at Aegospotami in 405 B.C.E.?
(2nd) PELOPONNESIAN WAR
B1: Following the conclusion of the Peloponnesian war, what famous fortifications of Athens were
brought down as part of the peace conditions?
LONG WALLS
B2: What political oligarchy was formed based on a measure presented by Dracontides after Lysander
had the current leaders of Athens arrested and imprisoned?
30 TYRANTS

Agon – Preliminary Round 2
1. The constellation Aquarius commemorated and immortalized what Trojan youth, who had been
abducted by Zeus?
GANYMEDE
B1: What gift did Hermes offer Ganymede’s father in an effort to console him over the loss of his son?
HORSES (PAIR OF MARES) / GOLDEN GRAPEVINE
B2: What other constellation commemorates the abduction of Ganymede?
AQUILA
2. After he was removed from his post for failing to take Amphipolis, who turned to writing history,
penning the famous funeral oration of Pericles as part of his History of the Peloponnesian War?
THUCYDIDES
B1: One critic, Dionysius, judged Thucydides to be inferior to what other historian from his own
hometown of Halicarnassus?
HERODOTUS
B2: Who continued Thucydides’s history with his Hellenica, describing Greek history up to the battle of
Mantinea?
XENOPHON
3. What derivative of a Greek word meaning “king” is “a mythical reptile with a lethal gaze or breath,
hatched from a serpent and a rooster”?
BASILISK
B1: What derivative of a Greek word meaning “the north wind” means “beyond the northernmost north”
and originally referred to a race of giants in mythology?
HYPERBOREAN
B2: What derivative of a Greek word meaning “wound” means “emotionally disturbing or distressing”?
TRAUMATIC
4. What type of accent in Ancient Greek would be found on the first word of the phrase τὸ ἔργον?
GRAVE
B1: What type of breathing in Ancient Greek would be found on the second word of that phrase?
SMOOTH
B2: What type of accent in Ancient Greek would be found on the first word of the phrase ὁ ἄνθρωπος?
NONE
5. The passes of Petra, Volustana, and Tempe were all possible entrances for the Persians to press upon the
Spartans at what narrow pass that saw Leonidas and 300 Spartans fall in 480 B.C.E. to the massive army
of Xerxes?
THERMOPYLAE
B1: The fall of the Greek contingent at Thermopylae is said to have been at the hands of what Malian
Greek who led a group of Immortals under Hydarnes through a secret pass to catch the Greek contingent
from behind?
EPHIALTES
B2: While the battle of Thermopylae was going on, what sea battle was being fought at the same time?
ARTEMISIUM
6. Give the form of the definite article to agree with the Greek noun σοφία, which means “wisdom.”
ἡ
B1: Give the form of the definite article to agree with the noun form δῶρα, which means “gifts.”
τά

B2: Give the forms of the definite article that would agree with each of those nouns if they were in the
dative plural.
ταῖς & τοῖς (RESPECTIVELY)
7. What goddess's offspring included Pontus, Tisiphone, Nereus, and the Meliae?
GE / GAEA
B1: What personifications of the mountains were also children of Gaea?
OUREA
B2: What son of Gaea was the father of Iris and the Harpies?
THAUMAS
8. What is the meaning of the Greek preposition σύν?
WITH
B1: What is the meaning of the Greek preposition κατά?
DOWN (FROM) / AGAINST / ALONG
B2: What is the meaning of the Greek preposition ἀνά?
UP (TO)
9. Receiving commissions from the royal houses of Aegina, Syracuse, and Cyrene, what Theban poet
composed epinicia honoring the winners at the four great games, causing Alexander the Great to spare
his house when he sacked Thebes?
PINDAR
B1: Name two of the four great games for which Pindar wrote his victory odes.
ANY TWO OF: OLYMPIAN, PYTHIAN, NEMEAN, ISTHMIAN
B2: What Boeotian poetess, perhaps Pindar’s teacher, criticized some of his early poems first for their
lack of mythological references, then for including too much myth?
CORINNA
10. At what type of event in Ancient Greece, which directly followed a dinner, would participants enjoy
recitations, music, or discussion over the common activity of drinking wine?
SYMPOSIUM / συμπόσιον
B1: [Send this link into the chat: Visual] I have shared with you a document containing two images.
Open the document, and examine the first image. You are looking at a piece of Ancient Greek pottery
with a depiction of Dionysus and Ariadne in the center. Appropriately, this vessel is connected with
drinking, and was a bowl in which wine was mixed with water. What was this vessel called in Ancient
Greece, from which symposiasts would take wine?
KRATER / κρατήρ
B2: Now scroll to the second image. You are looking at an image of Achilles slaying Penthesilea on a
different type of vessel. What was this, which had two handles and could be used for wine storage,
called in Ancient Greece?
AMPHORA / ἀμφορεύς
11. Cyzicus, Chalcedon, Pithecusae, and Cumae are all examples of what types of places founded by oecists
who gained autonomy and rule after leaving their homeland?
COLONIES
B1: What colony, founded in 734 B.C. by Corinth, would become the chief city of Sicily?
SYRACUSE
B2: What was the term for the homeland or “mother city” from which oecists would come?
METROPOLIS
12. Translate from Greek to English: πρὸς τὸν ἥλιον βλέπομεν.
WE LOOK AT THE SUN / TOWARDS THE SUN

B1: Translate from Greek to English: μὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ κυρίου βαῖνε.
DON’T WALK AWAY FROM THE LORD/MASTER
B2: Translate from Greek to English: τίς τὴν φίλην ἀδελφὴν ἐκάλει;
WHO WAS CALLING THE/MY DEAR SISTER?
13. The Persians, which is the only surviving tragedy on a historical event, as well as Prometheus Bound
and the Oresteia trilogy, were all written by what author, the earliest tragedian whose work survives?
AESCHYLUS
B1: Name any two of the three plays in the Oresteia trilogy.
ANY TWO OF: AGAMEMNON; THE LIBATION BEARERS/CHOEPHOROI; EUMENIDES
B2: Which tragedy of Euripides, on the same subject as The Libation Bearers, mocks Aeschylus’s
improbable recognition scene involving a footprint and a lock of hair?
ELECTRA
14. What woman in mythology, seeing a signal fire in the nearby village of Lyrceia, knew that she had
successfully helped her husband flee on their wedding night in defiance of the orders that her father had
given her and her 49 sisters?
HYPERMNESTRA
B1: Who was this fortunate husband whose life was spared?
LYNCEUS
B2: Name Lynceus’ father who tragically lost 49 sons in a single night.
AEGYPTUS
15. Identify the use of the dative case in the following sentence: λέγει τοὺς λόγους τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ.
INDIRECT OBJECT
B1: Now identify the use of the dative in this sentence: ἔστιν ἐν τῷ τόπῳ ἄνθρωπος.
PLACE WHERE / OBJECT OF PREPOSITION
B2: Now identify the use of the dative in this sentence: λίθῳ βάλλει τὸν ἄνθρωπον.
MEANS
16. What man, whose attempted seduction by Alcibiades is described in the Symposium, rejects Crito’s
suggestion to break out of prison in the Crito, and describes himself stinging men like a gadfly in the
Apology — all dialogues written by his pupil Plato?
SOCRATES
B1: In the Symposium, Socrates claims to derive his view on love from what Mantinean woman?
DIOTIMA
B2: In which Platonic dialogue does Socrates describe the immortality of the soul in the hours preceding
his death?
PHAEDO
17. Translate from English into the best Attic Greek: “We do not persuade the god.”
οὐ πείθομεν τὸν θεόν.
B1: Now translate this sentence into the best Attic Greek: “We were not persuading the gods.”
οὐκ ἐπείθομεν τοὺς θεούς.
B2: Translate this sentence into the best Attic Greek: “Animals are sacred.”
ζῷά ἐστιν ἱερά.
18. At least 6000 votes cast with pieces of potsherd were necessary to perform what action, that would force
a citizen of Athens to leave within 10 days of the voting and to go into exile for 10 years?
OSTRACISM
B1: Which son of Charmus did Cleisthenes have banished by the first ostracism practiced in 487 B.C.?
HIPPARCHUS

B2: The practice of using ostracisms to get rid of political enemies was quickly exploited by which
famous Athenian who had his opponents Xanthippus and Aristides ostracized?
THEMISTOCLES
19. Having fought at various times against Heracles, Priam, Theseus, and Bellerophon, what tribe from
Themiscyra saw several of their warrior queens killed or kidnapped by enemy generals?
AMAZONS
B1: Which Amazon queen was abducted by Theseus?
HIPPOLYTE / ANTIOPE
B2: Which Amazon queen was purified by Priam after accidentally murdering a fellow Amazon?
PENTHESILEIA
20. What is the general term for Greek words that often go untranslated but modify the tone of the sentence
in some way, such as γέ, οὖν, or ἄρα?
PARTICLES
B1: Give one meaning that the pair of particles μέν...δέ often have when used together.
ON THE ONE HAND...ONE THE OTHER HAND / BOTH...AND / _____...BUT/WHILE/WHEREAS
B2: What particle in Greek often accompanies a name in the vocative case and is considered
exclamatory?
ὦ

Agon – Final Round
1. The epomis was pulled over the shoulders and fastened with pins to form what common female dress
from the Archaic period?
PEPLOS
B1: What linen cloak or shawl could be worn over the peplos?
HIMATION
B2: A fashion change took place in the Classical period where both men and women in Greece would
wear what wide tunic?
CHITON
2. According to Pausanias, what woman was hanged on Rhodes by Polyxo, who attributed her husband's
death at Troy to this woman's abduction at the hands of Paris?
HELEN
B1: Who was the husband of Polyxo and son of Heracles that led 9 ships from Rhodes?
TLEPOLEMUS
B2: In another version of Helen’s life post-Troy, she was actually found in which country, under the
guard of Proteus’s son?
EGYPT
3. Translate the following sentence from Greek into idiomatic English: “οἱ δοῦλοι οὐ πείθονται τῷ κακῷ
δεσπότῃ.”
THE SLAVES DO NOT OBEY/TRUST THE EVIL MASTER.
B1: Now translate this sentence into idiomatic English: “ἡ θεὸς τὸν οἶκον Ἀθήνησιν ἔθηκεν.”
THE GODDESS MADE/PLACED HER HOME IN ATHENS.
B2: Now translate this sentence from Greek into idiomatic English: “τοὺς γίγαντας τοὺς βοῦς
κλέψαντας νῦν Κύκλωπας καλοῦμεν.”
THE GIANTS WHO STOLE COWS WE NOW CALL CYCLOPES.
4. What work of Greek literature includes judgments such as “Homer and Empedocles [...] have really
nothing in common apart from their meter” and “Margites stands in the same relation to our comedies as
Iliad and Odyssey to our tragedies,” showing its author Aristotle’s systematic analysis of types of
poetry?
(ARISTOTLE’S) POETICS / Περὶ ποιητικῆς
B1: To what poet was the Margites ascribed by Aristotle?
HOMER
B2: Also falsely ascribed to Homer was a 303-line poem about a war between what two species of
animals, known for its silly names and descriptions of weaponry?
FROGS AND MICE
5. Complete the following analogy: δίκαιος : δικαιοσύνη :: ἀληθής : [blank].
ἀλήθεια
B1: Translate the motto of Yale, Lūx et Vēritās, into the best Attic Greek.
Φῶς καὶ Ἀλήθεια
B2: Now convert the motto of Yale into the dual number, which does not have an appropriate Latin
rendering.
Φῶτε καὶ Ἀληθεία
6. What self-described “cosmopolitan” followed in the footsteps of his teacher Antisthenes by denying the
validity of class distinctions, telling Alexander the Great to get out of his sunlight and spending his days
in a large tub?

DIOGENES (OF SINOPE)
B1: To what philosophical school did Diogenes and Antisthenes belong?
CYNICISM
B2: Which philosophical school was a direct descendant of Cynicism, since its founder Zeno of Cition
was a pupil of the Cynic Crates?
STOICISM
7. What is the meaning of the Greek noun ἱππεύς?
HORSEMAN/KNIGHT
B1: What is the meaning of the Greek verb ἐρωτάω?
ASK
B2: τί Ἀγγλιστὶ σημαίνει ὅρος;
BOUNDARY [ὄρος is “mountain”]
8. Who was worshipped as a hero in Euboea at a shrine named after his mother, Elare, but is more often
portrayed as a villain stretched over 9 acres as vultures pick at his liver in the underworld?
TITYUS
B1: Tityus was punished in the underworld for having tried to rape which Titaness?
LETO
B2: According to the Odyssey, which judge of the underworld visited Tityus in Euboea to possibly give
him his punishment?
RHADAMANTHYS / RHADAMANTHUS
9. Translate into the best Attic Greek the Latin phrase “Deō volente.”
(τοῦ) θεοῦ βουλομένου / ἐθέλοντος
B1: Now translate this Latin sentence into Attic Greek using the most common construction: “Bona
facimus amīcīs nostrīs.”
ἀγαθὰ/καλὰ τοὺς ἡμετέρους φίλους ποιοῦμεν
B2: Besides differences in case usage, Latin and Greek have many differences in idiom as well. With
only two words — both verb forms — translate into Attic Greek: “Forte bibit.”
τυγχάνει πίνων
10. Said to have been revived by the Elean Iphitus, what games were made Panhellenic by Pheidon and saw
their first historical victors crowned with wreaths of wild olive in 776 B.C.E.?
OLYMPICS / OLYMPIC GAMES
B1: Which former Olympic victor attempted to establish a tyranny in Athens during the Olympic games
only to fail and be executed by Megacles?
CYLON
B2: What other Panhellenic games were established either by Periander or in commemoration of the end
of tyranny in Corinth after the death of Psammetichus?
ISTHMIAN GAMES
11. What island witnessed detailed biological research conducted by Aristotle, a feud at Mytilene between
the tyrant Pittacus and the lyric poet Alcaeus, and the love songs of the so-called “Tenth Muse”?
LESBOS
B1: In what city did poets such as Terpander, Alcman, and Tyrtaeus live and compose their works,
though none of them were born there except possibly Tyrtaeus?
SPARTA
B2: What Ionian city, a center of learning inhabited by the first known Greek historian, Hecataeus,
caused so much trauma when it was sacked by the Persians that a tragedian named Phrynichus was fined
a thousand drachmae for writing a play on the subject?
MILETUS

12. Identify the use of the genitive case in the following sentence: “ἆρα ἤκουσας τῆς ἐκεῖ φωνῆς;”
GENITIVE WITH SPECIAL VERBS/OF THE THING/OBJECTIVE
B1: Now identify the use of the genitive case in the following sentence: “στρατιώτης ἀπέθανεν ὑπὸ
τοῦ πολεμίου.”
(PERSONAL) AGENT
B2: Now identify the use of the genitive case in the following sentence: “ἥρωες πολὺ διαφέρουσιν
μαχομένων ἄλλων.”
COMPARISON / SEPARATION
13. Who feigned friendship with Stymphalus before murdering him to conquer Arcadia, just as he had done
with Myrtilus to defeat Oenomaus in a chariot race and win the hand of Hippodameia?
PELOPS
B1: By defeating Oenomaus in a chariot race, Pelops became the king of which city?
PISA
B2: Furthermore, to achieve forgiveness for the murder of Myrtilus, Pelops established the worship of
which god and father of Myrtilus throughout the Peloponnesus?
HERMES
14. The first syllable of the verb ἔχω and the adjective ταχύς underwent what phonological process, in
which the first of two adjacent aspirated syllables loses its aspiration? This process is the opposite of the
process in which the prefix συν- becomes συλ- when compounded with λέγω, λαμβάνω, and other
verbs.
DISSIMILATION (OF ASPIRATES) / GRASSMANN'S LAW
B1: What is the 2nd principal part of ἔχω, which is the primary evidence of dissimilation in this verb?
ἕξω
B2: The initial aspiration of ἕξω originally developed from what consonant in Greek? This consonant
often drops out between vowels, which explains why the imperfect of ἔχω is εἶχον and not *ἦχον,
among many other phenomena.
SIGMA
15. What kingdom saw the invasion of the Cimmerians and their later expulsion by Ardys, the usurpation of
Candaules by Gyges, and the introduction of coinage to the Greek world?
LYDIA
B1: What capital city of Lydia did the Cimmerians capture in their invasion?
SARDIS
B2: As mentioned in the tossup, Lydia is known for its coinage. Of what silver-gold alloy were the coins
of Lydia made?
ELECTRUM / ἤλεκτρον [PROMPT ON “WHITE GOLD”]
16. Translate the following sentence from English into the best Attic Greek: “We will easily win Agon.”
ῥᾳδίως (τὸν) Ἀγῶνα / (ἐν) (τῷ) Ἀγῶνι νικήσομεν.
B1: Now translate this sentence from English into the best Attic Greek: “We will show ourselves to the
woman.”
τῇ γυναικὶ δειξόμεθα/δηλωσόμεθα/φανούμεθα // ἡμᾶς αὐτοὺς δείξομεν/δηλώσομεν/φανοῦμεν.
B2: Now translate this sentence from English into the best Attic Greek: “It is necessary for us to keep
watch the entire night.”
δεῖ/χρὴ/ἀνάγκη ἡμᾶς ὅλην/πᾶσαν τὴν νύκτα φυλάττειν.
17. Who forced the leader Boges to commit suicide when he besieged Eion, defeated the Persians at the
battle of Eurymedon, found the bones of a mythological hero, and was a son of Miltiades ostracized in
461 B.C.?
CIMON

B1: Which mythological hero’s bones did Cimon find?
THESEUS
B2: Which two leaders in Athens brought bribery charges against Cimon and had him ostracized in 461
B.C.?
PERICLES & EPHIALTES
18. A utopia is generally defined as “an imagined place or state in which everything is perfect.” From what
two Greek words, with what meanings, do we derive “utopia”?
οὐ - NOT and τόπος - PLACE
B1: What is the meaning of the Greek root common to the following words: manic, megalomaniacal,
necromancy?
BE MAD/ENRAGED/FURIOUS
B2: Naology is the study of sacred edifices. From what two Greek words, with what meanings, do we
derive naology?
ναός/νεώς - TEMPLE and λόγος - WORD / REASON / LOGIC
19. Who fought all the following: a tribe led by Mygdon who feuded with the Mariandyni, the Bebryces; a
giant who gained gained strength every time he came in contact with his mother, Antaeus; and the father
of Iole who had taught him archery, Eurytus?
HERACLES
B1: While Heracles was working for Omphale, he killed what native of Aulis who would force passersby to hoe his vineyard?
SYLEUS
B2: Instead of fighting, while Heracles was in the underworld he saved what youth who had exposed the
fact that Persephone had eaten the pomegranate and was subsequently turned into an owl?
ASCALAPHUS
20. Accompanied by the slave Xanthias, what god travels to the Underworld in order to judge between
Aeschylus and Euripides in Aristophanes’s Frogs — an appropriate role, since all Athenian theatrical
productions were performed at his festival?
DIONYSUS
B1: According to Herodotus, what legendary poet invented the dithyramb, a type of hymn dedicated to
Dionysus, while at the court of Periander in Corinth?
ARION
B2: What playwright, the third major playwright of Old Comedy alongside Aristophanes and Cratinus,
wrote a play entitled Taxiarchoi with a plot similar to Frogs, in which Dionysus looks for a good
commander?
EUPOLIS

Finals Tiebreakers
1. Translate the shared Homeric motto of the University of St Andrews and Boston College, αἰὲν
ἀριστεύειν.
EVER / ALWAYS TO EXCEL // EVER / ALWAYS TO BE THE BEST
2. In Athens, familial blood-feuds were largely replaced with state law-courts when a system of laws —
said to be written “not in ink but in blood” due to its harshness — was created by what man?
DRACO
3. When a goddess pulls back his golden hair, what man is finally restrained after declaring “give back the
girl, as the god demands” and threatening to sail home to Phthia in two speeches in the Iliad?
ACHILLES
4. What object, which was famously abandoned by a poet from Paros — Archilochus — as well as by
Alcaeus, gave its title to a poem attributed to Hesiod about the conflict between Heracles and Cycnus?
SHIELD
5. What English noun, and truly a compound adjective, is derived from a Greek adjective meaning
“twisted” and a Greek noun meaning “feather” or “wing,” and is a type of aerial vehicle featuring a
single rotor above its body?
HELICOPTER

Αὐρηλία Passage
Αὐρηλία, ᾗ ἡ πόλις ἐδόκει, ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἦν σὺν τῇ μεγάλῃ οἰκίᾳ καὶ τῇ ἵππῳ.
τρεισκαίδεκα τῷ Διὶ ἀγῶνας μεγάλους ἐν τῷ κυνηγετικῷ θεάτρῳ Αλεξανδρείας
ἐθεώρουν. τέλος ὠργισμένη ἥδε ἡ ἵππος οἴκαδε ἦρξεν ἀναβαίνουσα. Ζεὺς δὲ, τοῖς
ἀγῶσιν χαίρων, δεδοικυῖαν τὴν ἵππον ῥᾳδίως ἀναφέρει εἰς τὸν ἐγγὺς τοῦ θεάτρου
σταθμόν. εὐοῖ.

