1.

What region, where only hugging a king’s knees allows a Cretan refugee to be spared in the Odyssey, is the source
of powerful pharmaka from Polydamna and the home of the seal-herding god that Menelaüs captured to find a way
home?
EGYPT
B1: What husband of Polydamna was the warden of the mouth of the Nile River, according to Herodotus’ Histories?
THON(IS)
B2: In Odysseus’ made-up story, he was afterwards taken to Phoenicia and driven by a storm to Thesprotia, where
what king hosted him?
PHEIDON

2.

What Greek word had its definition augmented to add “πλατυώνυχος” after Diogenes appeared at Plato’s Academy
with a plucked chicken to prove that Plato’s definition of a “two-legged featherless animal” was incomplete?
ἄνθρωπος / ἄνθρωπον
B1: Fill in the blank in Aristotle’s aphorism “ὁ ἄνθρωπος φύσει [blank] ζῷον.” You may give a Greek or English
answer.
πολιτικὸν / POLITICAL
B2: In what dialogue by Plato, in which Socrates and the title mathematician debate three notions of justice, does
Socrates report Protagoras’ aphorism “πάντων χρημάτων μέτρον ἐστὶν ἄνθρωπος”?
(PLATO’S) THEAETETUS

3.

After placing a σφρηγίς on his work, what author repeatedly praises the aristocratic ἁγαθοί and denigrates the
impoverished κακοί throughout a 1,400-line elegiac collection whose legitimately attributed poems apostrophize his
ἐρόμενος, Cyrnus?
THEOGNIS (OF MEGARA)
B1: Semonides, another elegist from the era of Theognis, was supposedly born on Samos but helped colonize what
island?
AMORGOS
B2: What other elegist’s first and most important fragment begins “for now the floor is clean, and the hands of all,
and the cups,” describing the preparations for a feast?
XENOPHANES (OF COLOPHON)

4.

What noblewoman, captured when soldiers used tent pegs and flaxen lines in a night-climb of the “Sogdian Rock,”
had a son who co-ruled with Arrhidaeus in Macedon after the death of her husband, Alexander the Great?
ROXANA / ROXANE
B1: Roxana and her son, Alexander IV, quickly lost power and were interned by Cassander at what city, founded as
an Athenian colony by Hagnon thirty years after a failed colonization expedition to Ennea Hodoi?
AMPHIPOLIS
B2: According to Arrian, when he was asking for the surrender of the Sogdian Rock, Alexander was told by its
defenders that he would need what sort of men if he wanted to capture the fortress? A description is fine.
“MEN WITH WINGS” // MEN WHO COULD FLY [ACCEPT EQUIVALENTS]

5.

The subject of John Dewar Denniston’s most famous scholarly work and divided into groupings like “inferential,”
what class of words is essentially replicated by pitch and stress in English, but can have translations like “on the one
hand … on the other hand”?
(GREEK) PARTICLES
B1: What Greek particle’s varied uses include effectively meaning “when” if it occurs in expressions that denote a
coincidence of time?
καὶ
B2: What Greek asseverative particle is commonly used in oaths alongside the accusative of the deity addressed?
μά

6.

Called “the divine daughters of Eteocles” by Theocritus, the daughters of Helios and Aegle by Antimachus, and the
daughters of Zeus and Eurynome by Hesiod, what group of goddesses usually included Euphrosyne and Thalia?
GRACES / CHARITES
B1: This Eteocles was an early ruler of what wealthy Boeotian city, which was also ruled by Clymenus and his son
Erginus?
(BOEOTIAN) ORCHOMENUS
B2: In what specific form were the Graces worshipped at Orchomenus according to Pausanias?
(AS) FALLEN STONES // (AS) METEORITES

7.

What island, home to a fresco of miniature ships in procession that Spyridon Marinatos excavated within its city of
Akrotiri, may have inspired the myth of Atlantis when a cataclysmic volcanic eruption destroyed it in the Late
Bronze Age?
THERA / SANTORINI
B1: A fresco from Akrotiri shows young girls harvesting what crop and delivering it to a goddess who is flanked by
a blue monkey and a griffin?
CROCUS / SAFFRON
B2: Thera was found in the Cyclades, where two islands flourished commercially during the middle of the 3rdmillennium B.C.? Name either: one is known for an enigmatic figure of a woman who appears nearly triangular,
while another is known for a figure of a male harp player.
SYROS or KEROS

8.

What type of object, called εὐνή or λέχος by Homer, is the place where one would εὕδω or κεῖμαι if one was ὕπνῳ
νικώμενος?
(MARRIAGE-)BED // (MARRIAGE-)COUCH
B1: What is the meaning of the Homeric noun “ἄλοχος”?
WIFE // SPOUSE // BED-PARTNER
B2: What verb, related etymologically to κεῖμαι, means “to lull to sleep?”
κοιμάω

9.

What male name is shared between the protagonist of a work purporting to explain a painting on Lesbos that the
novelist Longus contrived and the inspiration for Bion’s Lament for Adonis, which imitated a lament by Theocritus?
DAPHNIS
B1: From what Anatolian city did Bion hail, just like a late epic poet with the name “Quintus” who wrote the
Posthomerica?
SMYRNA
B2: Longus’ Daphnis and Chloe is one of the five canonical Greek romantic novels. Name two of the other four
novels and identify their authors.
TWO OF: CHAEREAS (AND CALLIRRHOE) by CHARITON (OF APHRODISIAS); {HABROCOMES AND
ANTHIA // THE EPHESIAN TALE // EPHESIACA} by XENOPHON (OF EPHESUS); {THEAGENES AND
CHARICLEA // AETHIOPICA} by HELIODORUS (OF EMESA); (THE ADVENTURES OF) LEUCIPPE AND
CLITOPHON by ACHILLES TATIUS

10. Note to players: There will be an extra clue after the sentence is read twice. Using the perfect of κτάομαι, say in the
best Attic Greek: “Are you worthy of the freedom which you possess?” That’s: “Are you worthy of the freedom
which you possess?” In sentences like this one, the relative pronoun is usually attracted into its antecedent’s case,
rather than remaining in the accusative.
(ἆρα) (εἶ / ἐστὲ) {ἀξιός / ἄξιοι} τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἧς {κέκτησαι / κέκτησθε};
B1: Now, using the aorist of δίδωμι and another instance of relative attraction, say in the best Attic Greek: “I should
fear to follow the leader that he would give.”
φοβοίμην ἂν τῷ ἡγεμόνι ᾧ δοίη ἕπεσθαι

B2: Now translate this sentence from Isocrates into English: “περὶ ὧν οὐδεὶς ἂν τολμήσειεν ἀντειπεῖν, ὡς …
πολιτείαν δ᾽ οἵαν εἶναι χρή, παρὰ μόνοις ἡμῖν ἐστιν.”
CONCERNING THESE THINGS NO ONE WOULD DARE TO SPEAK AGAINST (ME) — THAT
GOVERNMENT (SUCH) AS IT OUGHT TO BE, EXISTS AMONG US ALONE [ACCEPT EQUIVALENTS]
11. What man, attested by the “disk of Iphitus” at Olympia, supposedly added obai to phylai and mandated an
occasional apella after receiving the “Great Rhetra,” which is sometimes considered to be Sparta’s constitution?
LYCURGUS (OF SPARTA)
B1: The Great Rhetra was treated as the source of Sparta’s dual kingship, which was the focus of competition
between what two dynastic lines?
AGIAD(S) and EURYPONTID(S)
B2: The harsh discipline imposed by Lycurgus was re-enacted every year, when youths would try to steal what
foodstuff from Artemis Orthia’s altar, which was defended by a group of older boys with whips?
CHEESE
12. What man found a great-grandson of Orestes named Agorius to share the kingdom he had just won via Pyraechmes,
finalizing the rule of Elis that he initially gained for being an oracle’s prophesied “three-eyed man”?
OXYLUS
B1: What type of soldier was Pyraechmes, who defeated the Eleian champion Degmenus in single combat?
SLINGER
B2: When Oxylus died, what son of his succeeded him?
LAIAS
13. What meaning is shared by the adjective at the ultimate root of “austere,” the adjective at the root of “skeleton,” and
the adjective at the root of “Xerox,” which comes from ξηρός?
DRY / DRIED-UP / WITHERED / PARCHED [ACCEPT EQUIVALENTS]
B1: What English word was a derivative of ξηρός through a word meaning “the philosopher’s stone” in Arabic?
ELIXIR
B2: What is the meaning of the Greek noun at the root of “enzyme”?
LEAVEN / YEAST / FERMENT
14. What region is described in a lost ethnography by the ambassador Megasthenes and in a 48-book epic that was
written in the 5th century A.D. by Nonnus and describes an expedition by Dionysus to the east?
INDIA / PAKISTAN / PUNJAB / INDUS // INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
B1: For what reason did Nonnus choose precisely 48 books as the length for his epic poem? A description is fine.
COMBINED LENGTH OF ILIAD AND ODYSSEY [ACCEPT EQUIVALENTS]
B2: What author wrote an Indica before Megasthenes did, though he is better known for the 23-book history
Persica?
CTESIAS (OF CNIDUS)
15. What rhetorical device is found in the sentences “ἀλλ᾽ ἢ πνοαῖσιν ἢ βαθυσκαφεῖ κόνει κρύψον νιν” and “ἔδουσί τε
πἱονα μῆλα οἶνόν τ᾽ ἔξαιτον,” since both have a verb yoking together two differing objects?
ZEUGMA
B1: What form of brachylogy is found in Sappho’s lines “πάτρος δὲ δόμον λίποισα / χρύσιον ἦλθες / ἄρμ’
ὐπασδεύξαισα,” where χρύσιον blends the two clauses together by effectively modifying both δόμον and ἄρμ’?
APO KOINOU
B2: What form of brachylogy, in which two expressions or clauses are condensed into one, can be found in the
sentence “εἰς τὸ βαλανεῖον βούλομαι,” meaning “I want to go to the bath”?
PRAEGNANS CONSTRUCTIO
16. Dinocrates of Rhodes undertook what general task at the site of Rhakotis, where he followed the principles of a
Milesian named Hippodamus but was temporarily stymied when birds ate the flour that his workers had set out?

URBAN PLANNING // TOWN PLANNING // PLANNING A CITY [ACCEPT EQUIVALENTS]
B1: Hippodamus may have helped re-design Rhodes, but he was best known for his planning of what two Athenian
cities?
THURII and PIRAEUS
B2: What Athenian seer, a friend of Pericles, led the colonization of Thurii?
LAMPON

17. What type of object would fall from Coroebus’ hands wherever he should build a city according to the Pythia — a
reversal from when an enraged Heracles snatched one from Xenocleia as she sat on it at Delphi?
(DELPHIC) TRIPOD
B1: In another story, a disguised version of what god interrupts the sacrifice of a Delphic tripod to himself, provides
the sacrificants with what they need, grabs the tripod, and walks away?
TRITON
B2: Coroebus founded the city of Tripodiscus where his tripod fell. Tripodiscus was in the vicinity of what city,
whose rule was occupied by an exiled Athenian, Pandion, after the banishment of its king Pylas?
MEGARA
18. What Greek letter ends adverbs meaning “pell-mell” and “with the fist” that are relics of the nominative case, as
well as an adverb that is joined with “λεγόμενον” to mean “a thing said only once”?
XI
B1: What Greek letter ends adverbs meaning “upwards” and “downwards” that are relics of the instrumental case?
OMEGA
B2: The word “πύξ” is cognate with the Greek noun for “fist,” which is the source of what English word?
PYGMY
19. Since it came third in the Dionysia to works by Cratinus and Amipsias, what play about Strepsiades was revised
before publication, though both versions described a contest between Just and Unjust Reason at a school run by a
caricatured Socrates?
(ARISTOPHANES’) CLOUDS
B1: The chorus in Clouds praises Aristophanes for lampooning what politician, who competes with a sausage-seller
in Knights? In that play, Demosthenes declares that “he kneaded a Laconian cake at Pylos, but [this politician]
snatched it up and himself served up the cake I had kneaded.”
CLEON
B2: What is the name of Socrates’ corrupt school of rhetoric in Aristophanes’ Clouds?
(THE) THINKERY // PHRONTISTERION
20. What man’s desire to “trample underfoot” the pride of Sparta almost convinced Athens to withhold aid for a siege of
Mt. Ithome, though the expedition’s failure allowed him to ostracize Cimon and begin reducing the Areopagus’
powers?
EPHIALTES
B1: Ephialtes’ conflict with his great rival, Cimon, came to a head when Cimon returned from what important
island, leading to an impeachment where Cimon was accused of being bribed by Alexander of Macedon not to
invade his territory?
THASOS
B2: Aristotle claimed that Ephialtes’ assassination was completed by a man from what city, near which a Spartan
victory allowed them to cut down the fruit trees along the Isthmus of Corinth on their journey home?
TANAGRA

