BUDDES Lower - Round 1
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is definitely not reflective of the
difficulty of the round or tournament. Topics in test questions may appear later in the tournament.”
0. Note to players: A description is acceptable. What things disappeared right before Hostilius Mancinus’ campaign
against the Numantines, counseled against Tiberius Gracchus’ decision to attend an assembly in the Campus Martius, and
were told to “drink”– since they would not “eat”– by Claudius Pulcher before being thrown into the ocean?
SACRED CHICKENS OF ROME
B1: What sound does a chicken make?
BAWK BAWK (ACCEPT EQUIVALENTS)
B2: What sound does a sacred chicken make?
BAWK BAWK (ACCEPT EQUIVALENTS)
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. Translate the following sentence into Latin: Vergil writes that two snakes killed the blind priest.
VERGILIUS SCRIBIT {DUŌS / DUĀS} {ANGUĒS / SERPENTĒS / DRACŌNĒS /
COLUBRĀS} {NECĀVISSE / INTERFĒCISSE} CAECUM {SACERDŌTEM /
VĀTEM}
B1: Translate this sentence into the best classical Latin: I think that Vergil is worthy of being praised.
PUTŌ VERGILIUM DIGNUM ESSE QUĪ LAUDĒTUR
B2: Translate this sentence into Latin, using a subjunctive: I hope that we will always remember Vergil.
SPERŌ FORE UT SEMPER MEMINERĪMUS {VERGILIUM / VERGILIĪ}
2. Before the Argonauts could reach Circe’s island, Castor and Pollux prayed for protection from the noxious fumes of
what river, which had sands of amber attributed to the sisters of Phaethon that wept when their brother fell from the sky
into it?
ERIDANUS
B1: What Argonaut was sometimes called the grandson of Eridanus, although he is more often known as the son of Teleon
that jumped overboard and swam towards the Sirens?
BUTES
B2: What son of Butes encountered a bull from the herd of Heracles, and, believing himself to be the stronger one of the
two, wagered his entire kingdom on a boxing match with the stranger?
ERYX
3. What historical couple’s obsession with appearing mythical began when they first introduced themselves as Dionysus
and Aphrodite to the Greeks, then when they sat on golden thrones in the Gymnasium robed as Osiris and Isis, alongside
their twins named after the sun, Helios, and the moon, Selene?
(MARC) ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA
B1: What king, who ruled Judea at this time, had his valuable balsam gardens at Jericho gifted to Cleopatra?
HEROD I // HEROD THE GREAT
B2: The year afterwards, what Armenian king withdrew his troops from Antony’s Parthian expedition, causing Antony to
lose 20,000 men and countless supplies during the disaster?
ARTAVASDES (II)
4. The ending -ciō is sometimes used to form what type of noun, which can express contempt, pity, and affection, but as
seen in nouns like ātriolum or libellus, more commonly shows size?
DIMINUTIVES

B1: What is the meaning of the diminutive form “maiusculus”?
A LITTLE BIGGER
B2: Give two possible diminutives of the noun homō, meaning “dwarf”.
ANY TWO OF: HOMUNCULUS / HOMUNCIŌ / HOMULLUS
5. According to Pausanias, a sanctuary of Apollo at Cumae housed what creature’s tusks, which ravaged Psophis until it
was driven out from its lair by shouts, then chased into a snowy mountain by the clever Heracles?
ERYMANTHIAN BOAR
B1: What mountain, similarly covered in snow, was home to wild animals that devoured the Mares of Diomedes upon
their release?
(MOUNT) OLYMPUS
B2: What group of Rhodian sorcerers possessed the ability to conjure snow, hail, and rain, which they used to predict the
Great Flood and flee to Asia Minor long before it arrived?
TELCHINES
6. First imported to Rome in 268 BC, what object had a massive variant erected in the Campus Martius with an Egyptian
obelisk as its gnomon, although it was viewed as inferior to the clepsydra since it could not be used at night?
SUNDIAL / SOLARIUM (PROMPT ON “CLOCK” OR “HOROLOGIUM”)
B1: This massive Horologium was dedicated to what emperor, who later limited the cost of a cena nuptialis to 1,000
sesterces?
AUGUSTUS
B2: What structure, north of the Horologium of Augustus, was also dedicated to Augustus, with bronze tablets of his Res
Gestae stationed in front?
MAUSOLEUM OF AUGUSTUS
7. To what Latin noun, which is similar to a tussis in that it cannot be hidden, does Vergil say “let us too yield”, although
an earlier part of that line which appears in Chaucer’s The Canterbury Tales claims that it “omnia vincit”, or conquers
all?
AMOR
B1: Give the Latin for the second part of that famous Vergilian line, meaning “let us too yield to love”.
ET NOS CEDAMUS AMORI
B2: According to Publilius Syrus, what kind of lover multa mentitur sibi, or “tells himself many lies”?
AN ANGRY ONE // IRATUS
8. Various senators claimed that they were forced to dress as slaves, run alongside chariots, and kiss the feet of what
emperor, whose blasphemous acts included driving Judaea and Mauretania to the brink of revolt, having incestuous
relations with his sister Drusilla, and forcing his soldiers to collect seashells?
CALIGULA
B1: Caligula ordered his legate Petronius to install a statue of himself in what structure, which would be humiliated
centuries later when the two drachma taxes it received annually were redirected to the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus?
TEMPLE AT JERUSALEM
B2: In 40 AD, what city saw a Greek mob force Jews to eat pork in a theater during the celebration of Caligula’s birthday,
prompting them to send a delegation led by the Jewish scholar Philo?
ALEXANDRIA
9. Note to players: a description is acceptable. What substance, which caused a dove pecking at the wine spilled by Ion to
die in agony, had first been given to his ancestor Erichthonius by Athena, as well as to Asclepius, who used the same
substance to revive Hippolytus?
(VIALS OF) GORGON’S BLOOD // MEDUSA’S BLOOD

B1: The deadly snakes that formed from the drops of Medusa’s blood as Perseus flew over Libya were responsible for the
death of what seer that travelled with the Argonauts?
MOPSUS
B2: According to Ovid’s Metamorphoses, what was seaweed transformed into when Perseus placed Medusa’s head onto
it?
CORAL
10. What “umpire of civil harmony”, upon his death, was too poor to afford a funeral, but was buried by those who he had
compared to limbs, and was then honored by the Patricians – whom he had compared to the belly – for his role in
convincing the Plebeians to return to Rome after the First Succession?
MENENIUS AGRIPPA
B1: The First Secession of the Plebs may have been sparked by what man’s execution, who was holding his third
consulship in 485 BC when he was condemned to death by the aristocratic Fabii?
SPURIUS CASSIUS
B2: The laws enacted after the Second Secession of the Plebs dealt with what concept, which was the right of public
appeal after being condemned to punishment by a magistrate?
PROVOCATIO
11. What meaning is shared by the noun maceria, which appears in Varro’s sentence “locus māceriā saepītur,” as well as
the more common noun pariēs and the plūrālia tantum word moenia?
WALL
B1: What other plūrālia tantum noun means “ambush”?
INSIDIAE
B2: At one point in the Metamorphoses, Ovid describes a pariēs with a tenuis rīma. What is a rīma?
CRACK / CHINK / FISSURE
12. What occupation, which Mestra disguised herself as to escape from her first master, was shared by a man named
Damarmenus that discovered the shoulder blade of Pelops, an unnamed man that saved Britomartis, a resident of
Anthedon named Glaucus, and a future king of Seriphos that protected Perseus?
FISHERMAN
B1: Poseidon not only gifted the ability of shapeshifting to Mestra but also to what other man, who unsuccessfully
attempted to defend Pylos from Heracles by attacking him in the form of an eagle?
PERICLYMENUS
B2: Mestra’s shapeshifting abilities might have induced Ovid to say that she married what man with somewhat similar
abilities, which he used to steal both the cattle of Eurytus and a helmet from Amyntor?
AUTOLYCUS
13. Who, alongside her large family, sat in the amphitheater of Alexandria to watch thirteen great games of Jupiter,
although her angry horse began to run back home at the end of her namesake passage?
AURELIA
B1 & B2: There are two errors in the Aurelia passage I pulled up from a tumblr page, written by the user “mayor
mccheese”. For five points each, identify the two errors in that passage: Aurelia, cui in urbs placebat, erat in Aegypto
cum familia sua ingenti et equo suo. tredecim ludos magnos Iovis in amphitheatro Alexandriae spectabat. tandem,
equus iratus domum recurrere coepit. Eheu!
NO “IN” BEFORE “URBS” AND A “ HIC” BEFORE “EQUUS”
14. Note to players: A description is acceptable. What object was surrounded by exaggerated “un-Roman sexual
practices” and arranged to be married to Vesta after being enshrined on the Palatine Hill, where it was celebrated by
anthems sung by Syrian women from Emesa?

CONICAL BLACK STONE
B1: At what city in 218 AD was Macrinus defeated by the troops of Elegabalus when most of his troops deserted him?
ANTIOCH
B2: Elagabalus’ antics, however, caused the Praetorian Guard to murder him and his mother Julia Soaemias as they hid in
what kind of building?
LATRINE / BATHROOM
15. What mythological figure, who lived on an island that allowed unsown plants to grow with the rain of Zeus, ignored
the warnings of Telemus during his quest for Galatea’s love, ultimately regretting it when he was blinded by a man who
introduced himself as “Nobody”?
POLYPHEMUS
B1: What king of Tiryns had the walls of his kingdom built by the Cyclopes, although he gave up a large portion of it after
his three daughters were cured from madness by Melampus?
PROETUS
B2: What city saw three daughters of Hyacinth sacrificed on a tomb to a Cyclops named Geraestus in a futile attempt to
avert a plague brought upon by the prayers of Minos?
ATHENS
16. Note to players: there will be an extra clue at the end of this sentence. Feel free to wait if you are unsure. Translate
into English the following sentence: “Nōn ante dormītum ībō quam pēnsa perfēcerō.” In this sentence, ante and quam
go together with the same meaning as antequam.
I WILL NOT GO TO SLEEP {BEFORE / UNTIL} I {FINISH // (WILL) HAVE
FINISHED} (MY) {HOMEWORK / ASSIGNMENTS}
B1: Now translate: “Horātius sōlus hostēs arcuit dōnec magnō cum fragōre pōns ruptus est.”
HORATIUS HELD OFF THE ENEMIES ALONE UNTIL THE BRIDGE WAS BROKEN WITH A GREAT CRASH
B2: Now translate: “Imperātor cēnsuit nōn sibi expectandum esse dum auxilia venīrent, sed statim pugnandum
esse.”
THE GENERAL THOUGHT (THAT) HE SHOULD NOT WAIT {FOR REINFORCEMENTS TO COME // UNTIL
REINFORCEMENTS CAME}, BUT (THAT) HE SHOULD FIGHT IMMEDIATELY
17. According to Lactantius, what man hastily sped along the cursus publicus, killing his previous horse each time he
changed mounts, until he reached Eboracum, encountered his father on his deathbed, and was proclaimed Augustus in 306
AD, though he would not really solidify his power until 312?
CONSTANTINE (I / THE GREAT)
B1: Though the soldiers proclaimed Constantine Augustus right after Chlorus’s death, the title really went to what man,
who had been Chlorus’ Caesar? He was eventually forced to surrender to Maximian at Ravenna.
(FLAVIUS VALERIUS) SEVERUS (II)
B2: Maximian eventually committed suicide after surrendering to Constantine in what city, which had previously been the
site of a naval battle won by Decimus Brutus and Gaius Trebonius?
MASSILIA / MARSEILLES
18. The Old French word naperon (“nap-air-on”), which provides us with the English words apron and napkin, is
ultimately derived from what Latin word meaning a cloth?
MAPPA
B1: What English word is derived from the Old French word nonper, which itself ultimately derives from the Latin words
non and par, though it followed a different path than “nonpareil?”
UMPIRE
B2: What English word, derived from the Northumbrian nedra and perhaps connected via its Proto-Indo-European roots
to the Latin word natrix, denotes a particularly venomous species of snake?

ADDER
19. What structure was first built with inspiration from the pharoah Mendes, then imitated by both a Delian dance called
the Crane and as well as a seashell brought to the kingdom of Cocalus with the purpose of tricking its inventor, Daedalus?
LABYRINTH
B1: A statue of the pharaoh Amenophis was often associated with what victim of Achilles, who gave his name to the birds
that were born from the smoke of his funeral pyre?
MEMNON
B2: The pharaoh Sesostris was claimed by Pausanias to have colonized what land at the farthest end of the Black Sea,
which had its capital at Aea?
COLCHIS
20. Who retired to Liternum and died in peace, a few years after he had disdainfully torn up his brother’s account-books to
save him from the relentless attacks of Cato the Elder, then escaped a personal charge of suspicious dealings with
Antiochus when he had accompanied his brother Lucius to Magnesia?
(P. CORNELIUS) SCIPIO AFRICANUS (THE ELDER)
B1: Livy points out the extraordinary coincidence that three of the best generals of their age all died in 183 BC — Scipio
Africanus, the Achaean strategos Philopoemen, and what other great foreign commander?
HANNIBAL [Liv. 39.50, but the date of Hannibal’s death is sourced]
B2: What Roman general, the victor at the Battle of Gythium, had been sent to the court of Prusias to demand Hannibal’s
extradition, prompting Hannibal to poison himself?
(T. QUINCTIUS) FLAMININUS

