BUDDES Upper - Round 1
Moderator says: “I will read one test question for no points. This question is definitely not reflective of the
difficulty of the round or tournament. Topics in test questions may appear later in the tournament.”
0. When recognized by the spotter, either translate the following command for ten imaginary points, or perform the
following command for one million imaginary points. Da mihi numerum securitatis socialis.
GIVE ME YOUR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER //
PLAYER SHOULD GIVE THEIR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER
B1: These next two boni have nothing to do with the tossup! For 5 points, using your knowledge of K2 Finals, answer the
following question: Verginius Rufus enjoyed strong health, except for what ailment, though it brought him no pain?
HIS HANDS SHOOK [ACCEPT EQUIVALENTS]
B2: For 5 points, what is the best move for white in this position? This is a puzzle with a rating of 2134.

ROOK TO F2
Moderator says: “Subsequent questions will count for points. Good luck and have fun!”
1. In classical Latin, the word exāmen generally refers to a group of what animals, who, according to Varro, “fingunt
[favum] multicavātum ē cērā,” and according to Vergil, “gentis adultōs ēdūcunt fētūs, aut [...] liquentia mella
stīpant” in a famous simile?
BEES
B1: Varro’s full sentence reads “favus est, quem fingunt [apēs] multicavātum ē cērā, cum singula cava sēna latera
habeant.” Based on this sentence, what is a favus?
HONEYCOMB
[“A favus is the thing which bees make out of wax, with many chambers, where each chamber has six sides”]
B2: Later in Vergil’s simile, what word does he use to refer to drones — that is, male bees which do not gather any nectar
or pollen? They are called an “ignavum pecus” which the worker bees “ā praesēpibus arcent”.
FŪCUS / FŪCŌS
2. What man, appearing in book 2, poem 5 of Phaedrus’ fables as the main character and responsible for Mamercus
Scaurus’ suicide when he was alluded to in his Atreus, was praised in both the Factorum et Dictorum Memorabilium of
Valerius Maximus and the Historiae of Velleius Paterculus?
TIBERIUS
B1: During the reign of Tiberius, what author’s Annales, which had glorified Brutus and gave the title of “Last of the
Romans” to Cassius, were saved from a fire and published afterwards?
CREMUTIUS CORDUS
B2: Give the name of one of the two authors that created a compendium of Valerius Maximus’ collection of Exempla in
the fourth century AD.
JULIUS PARIS OR IANUARIUS NEPOTIANUS

3. What town, which practiced a strange custom that allowed runaway slaves to kill and replace the head priest, housed a
temple to Diana Trivia, a secret cave in which Virbius was raised, and a spring of everlasting water that commemorated
the tears of Egeria?
ARICIA
B1: In Ovid’s Metamorphoses, what daughter of Chiron and Chariclo predicted that Asclepius would revive Hippolytus,
although her accurate predictions caused the anger of the gods to rain down upon her?
OCYRHOE / HIPPO
B2: In Ovid’s Metamorphoses, Virbius’ amazement at Egeria’s transformation is compared to Romulus seeing his spear
turn into what type of plant on the Palatine Hill?
WILLOW TREE
B3: Vergil claims that what animals are kept away from Aricia since they had been responsible for Hippolytus’ death,
although Nikhil acts like a complete buffoon and mistakenly claims that they were kept there in his Aeneïd guide?
HORSES
4. Growing wealthy from colonizing the island of Melita, and having access to a supply of tin from Cornwall, what
empire’s constitution was admired by Aristotle, and was noted for its council of thirty nobles, a high court of 104 judges,
and two annually elected shophets?
CARTHAGE
B1: During the First Punic War, Rome decided to attack Africa directly, taking inspiration from what despot of Syracuse
who had succeeded doing so fifty years prior in an attempt to defend his city from the Carthaginians?
AGATHOCLES
B2: Hannibal’s greatest success was at Cannae, after which 10,000 survivors led by Marcellus and Scipio were said to
have been assisted by what wealthy woman of Canusium, who offered them supplies at her own expense?
BUSA
5. Note to players: There will be an extra clue at the end of this sentence, and a second clue on a second reading of the
question. Knowing that Oedipodes is another name for Oedipus, translate the following sentence: “Furiīs immānibus
ēmptum Oedipodae sēdisse locō.” [pause for a few seconds] In this sentence, sēdisse is a subjective infinitive. [only read
what follows on the second reading of the question] You can translate it as “the right to sit”.
(THE RIGHT) TO {SIT // HAVE SAT} IN THE PLACE OF {OEDIPUS / OEDIPODES} WAS
BOUGHT WITH {GIANT / MONSTROUS / SAVAGE} {STRIFE / RAGE(S) / FURIES}
[boni redacted for later use, since nobody got the TU]
6. In Book 19 of the Iliad, Agememnon states that what goddess’ feet never touched the ground but rather passed through
the minds of men, among whom she lived after her involvement with the plan to make Eurystheus born earlier caused
Zeus to fling her from Olympus, despite being his eldest daughter?
ATE
B1: The Iliad portrays the goddess Ate outrunning what group, who follow behind her with wrinkled and downcast eyes,
healing those who have been hurt by Ate’s mischief?
LITAI / PRAYERS
B2: According to Nonnus, Ate persuaded what young boy to ride a bull in order to impress Dionysus, although he was
killed in the process, prompting Dionysus to commemorate the boy by naming the grapevine after him?
AMPELOS / AMPELUS
7. The sifonarii and the uncinarii were specialized variants of what group, which were established by the emperor
Augustus in 6 AD to not only serve as a night watch, but to also deal with the future issue of fires in ancient Rome?
VIGILES
B1: In 13 BC, Augustus recruited Italian members to establish what group, which primarily acted as a police force within
Rome but could be sent out to other cities to guard various shipments?

URBAN COHORTS // COHORTES URBANAE
B2: In contrast to the Vigiles, what name was given to the sector of the Servi Publici that acted as slave firemen?
TRIUMVIRI NOCTURNI
8. Before he died in a foreign land, who entrusted Mandrogerus with delivering a message to his son Querolus, offering
him a share to the treasure Lyconides had returned to him after it was stolen in the Aulularia?
EUCLIO
B1: What character in the Querolus performs the function of Querolus’s more-intelligent double as he interrogates the
main character’s faults, but plays the much less significant role of narrating the prologue in the Aulularia?
LAR (FAMILIARIS)
B2: What author addresses the Lares in the line “aluistis et idem, cursarem vestros cum tener ante pedes” while he
depicts his childhood-self running through his house in a rural world of idyllic happiness?
TIBULLUS
9. Declaring that public business had to cease while he searched the sky for omens, and designating the meeting days of
the Comitia Centuriata as days of feasting, who vetoed a land bill for the settlement of Pompey’s veterans but later
patrolled his fleet at Dyrrachium, then was elected consul with the assistance of his father-in-law Cato the Elder, but
retired when an angry mob broke his fasces and dumped a basket of feces over his head?
(MARCUS CALPURNIUS) BIBULUS
B1: Bibulus’s co-consul Julius Caesar was famous for his many military victories, one such victory being at what battle of
58 B.C., where he forced his men to fight against the Suebi and their chieftain Ariovistus?
VOSGES (RIVER)
B2: When Bibulus’s co-consul Caesar marched on Rome in 49 B.C., he was faced against what ally of Pompey, who made
an unauthorized attempt to intercept him at Corfinium, but quickly surrendered when only three of his legions remained?
(LUCIUS) DOMITIUS (AHENOBARBUS)
10. What Latin noun, in various forms, completes the following phrases: “[blank] post nummōs,” “ipsa quidem [blank]
pretium sibi”, “vīlius argentum est aurō, [blank] aurum”, and “[blank] et armīs”, the motto of a U.S. state?
VIRTŪS
B1: What word ending in -ās, of similar meaning, fills in the Juvenal quote “[blank] laudātur et alget”?
PROBITĀS
B2: Seekers of what Latin noun, which is the M in the abbreviation H.M.P., are told to circumspice in Sir Christopher
Wren’s epitaph?
MONUMENTUM
11. Disguised as a son of Creon named Hippotes, who dethroned Perses from the throne of Colchis with the help of his
mother, although Hesiod describes him as just a young boy that was reared by Chiron after being born to Aegeus and
Medea?
MEDUS
B1: What son of Medea and Jason succeeded Acastus to the throne of Iolcus and gave his name to a region famous for its
wild tribes of Lapiths and Centaurs?
THESSALUS
B2: Other accounts claim that the eponymous hero Thessalus was actually a son of Heracles born on what island, on
which Heracles killed Eurypylus and would have been killed by Chalcodon if Zeus had not whisked him away?
COS
12. Note to players: The “phrases” mentioned in this question are Allen and Greenough examples, not PMAQ. What type
of verb form appears in a Sallustian phrase meaning “when he perceived that these things were [...] not likely to end the

war,” a Caesarian phrase meaning “the opportunity to recover themselves,” and a Ciceronian phrase meaning “for the sake
of training the memory”?
GENITIVE GERUNDIVE [PROMPT ON “GERUNDIVE” WITH “WHAT CASE?”]
B1: The full Sallustian phrase, “quae postquam glōriōsa modo neque bellī patrandī cognōvit,” exemplifies what
specific use of the genitive, also found in the phrases “compendī facere” and “lucrī facere”?
PREDICATE
B2: It is possible that the Caesarian phrase in the toss-up, “suī colligendī facultās,” does not actually have a gerundive.
Instead, colligendī may be a genitive gerund, and suī what use of the genitive?
OBJECTIVE
13. Attacks on Metellus Caprarius and a parody of the trial of Quintus Mucius Scaevola can all be found in what work of
Latin literature, from which Persius was said to have taken the line “O curas hominum, O quantum est in rebus inane”,
that portrays Lentulus Lupus on trial by a Concilium Deorum?
(LUCILIUS’S) SATIRES / SERMONES / SCHEDIA
B1: Book 17 of Lucilius’s Satires parodies scenes taken from what work of literature, which is recast in a pornographic
mold in poem 68 of the Priapea?
ODYSSEY
B2: What author references Book 8 of the Odyssey by employing the characters Mars, Venus, and Vulcan in his De
Concubitu Martis et Veneris?
REPOSIANUS
14. Differentiate in ultimate derivation between the noun “fritter” meaning “a piece of food coated in batter and
deep-fried” and the verb “fritter” meaning “to waste,” keeping in mind that the noun is cognate with “fry” and the verb
with “frail.”
FRĪGŌ and FRANGŌ (RESPECTIVELY)
B1: Differentiate in derivation between “demur” and “demure.”
MOROR and MĀTŪRUS (RESPECTIVELY)
B2: Differentiate in derivation between “champaign” and “champagne.”
BOTH FROM CAMPUS [TRICK QUESTION]
15. What friend of the prophet Mani made a boastful claim of having defeated the Romans at Barbalissos and of reducing
the city of Dura-Europas, then murdered Chosroes before his westward campaign, although he would eventually be
defeated by an army under Macrianus and Odaenathus?
SHAPUR I
B1: What Persian king later executed the prophet Mani and entered negotiations with Diocletian, causing him to renounce
Persian claims to Mesopotamia and to recognize Tiridates III as the king of Armenia?
BAHRAM / VAHRAM / VARAHAN / VARANES I
B2: On his deathbed, Arcadius is sometimes said to have asked what other Persian king to protect Theodosius II from
usurpers, and later helped Anthemius settle disputes between Christian bishops?
YAZDGARD / YAZDIGIRD / YEZDEGERD I
16. Note to players: There is an extra clue after the sentence. Feel free to wait if you wish. Say in good Latin: “The
Carthaginians raised the sort of shout that winners often raise.” You should use either a correlative pair, or simply the
relative adjective quālis.
{POENĪ / CARTHĀGINIĒNSĒS} (TĀLEM) CLĀMŌREM
SUSTULĒRUNT QUĀLEM VICTŌRĒS SAEPE (TOLLUNT)
B1: Now say in good Latin, using two words starting with qu-: “Every time I see how eloquent you are, I am ashamed of
my stupidity.”

QUOTIĒNS(CUMQUE) VIDEŌ QUAM {ELOQUĒNS / FACUNDUS /
DISERTUS / CŌPIŌSUS} SĪS, (TOTIĒNS) MĒ STULTITIAE MEAE PUDET
B2: Now say in good Latin, using an indefinite form of quantus and a word with the suffix -dem: “However great a
reward you give to your soldiers, I will give as great a punishment to mine.”
{QUANTUMCUMQUE / QUANTUMQUANTUM} PRAEMIUM TUĪS
MĪLITIBUS {DEDERIS / DABIS}, TANTANDEM POENAM MEĪS DABŌ
17. Note to players: a description is acceptable. What action was being performed by Gordius when he spotted an eagle
and by Theiodamas when he was killed by Heracles, and although Philomelus was credited with being the first to perform
it, contradicts with the narrative that his father Iasion lay with Demeter in an area that had already thrice undergone this
action?
PLOWING (A FIELD)
B1: Iasion is sometimes credited with perfecting the rites of what cult, which eventually grew so great in prominence that
it even attracted Alexander the Great?
SAMOTHRACIAN MYSTERIES
B2: In Book 9 of Ovid’s Metamorphoses, Ceres expresses her wishes to provide what gift to Iasion, which Vulcan
similarly wishes for Erichthonius and Venus wishes for Anchises, although Zeus forbids it from happening?
REJUVENATION
18. What work, which saw the addition of information on “Marxism and classical antiquity” and “literary theory and
classical studies” to reflect the interdisciplinary character of classical studies, was compiled by Antony Spawforth and
Simon Hornblower to be “the ultimate reference work on the classical world,” and is known as a sourcebook for both
history and literature, even though barely anybody studies this massive dictionary?
THE OXFORD CLASSICAL DICTIONARY (3RD EDITION)
B1: Simon Hornblower was also known for a massive, 3-volume commentary on what classical Greek historian, whose
OCD entry describes such details as the famous “Melian Dialogue” and his difficult, often archaic, style?
THUCYDIDES
B2: What other little-used sourcebook on the NJCL Certamen Source list, by Amanda Claridge, was first explicitly cited
in PCL for the questions on the Lacus Curtius, the Forum of Augustus, and the Epulones?
(ROME -) OXFORD ARCHAEOLOGICAL GUIDE(S) // ROME, AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL GUIDE
19. What objects caused the Romans to hold a lectisternium during the siege of Veii, prohibited Pompey from restoring
Ptolemy Auletes to the throne of Alexandria, awarded Caesar the title of rex to defeat the Parthians, incited the sacrifice of
a Greek and Gallic couple after Cannae, and were preserved by Augustus long after Tarquinius Superbus had brought
them from Cumae centuries ago?
SIBYLLINE BOOKS
B1: Although Augustus honored the Sibylline Books, he disapproved of what foreign cult, which prospered on the island
of Mona until it was conquered by Suetonius Paulinus?
DRUIDISM
B2: The Sibylline Books ordered another sacrifice of a Greek and Gallic couple after what tribune of 114 B.C. had gained
the assistance of the judge Cassius Longinus and accused three Vestal Virgins of breaking their vow of chastity?
(SEXTUS) PEDUCAEUS
20. Claimed by Cicero to have surpassed all of the books of Greek philosophers, what document was famous for the
assonance, alliteration, and staccato rhythms in its parallel cola, such as in the line “si nox furtum faxsit, si im occisit,
iure caesus esto”, earning it the description of “fons omnis publici privatique iuris” by Livy?
TWELVE TABLES
B1: What work of Aelius Paetus served as a commentary on the Twelve Tables, doing such a great job that it was known
as the “cradle of the law” for centuries to come?

TRIPERTITA
B2: What Latin term did Cicero use to categorize the twelve tables, although the same words were used by the Twelve
Tables themselves to refer to magic formulas, and by Livy to refer to the text of a very ancient treaty?
CARMEN / CARMINA

