2011 Tennesee Questions—Prelims
1. Name the only emperor of the Julio-Claudian dynasty who had no Julian blood. ​Tiberius
B1: Which of the parents of the emperor Caligula contributed his Julian blood?
Germanicus​ / ​Agrippina the Elder (Augustus’ Granddaughter)---Yes, he gets it from both
sides…..whoops!
B2: Which of the parents of the emperor Claudius contributed his Julian blood?
Antiona (minor) (Daughter of Octavia)
2. Translate the noun phrase “the friendly goddess” into good Latin.
amica dea
B1:Change “amica dea” into dative plural. ​amicīs deabus
B2: Identify the dative use of “amicīs deabus” in the following sentence.
Marcus inimicos amicīs deabus delebit.
dative with adjective
3. How long did it take for Odysseus to reach his homeland of Ithaca after the Trojan War?
10 Years
B1:​ ​Despite the advances of numerous suitors, what wife of Odysseus remained faithful to her
husband during his twenty year absence?
Penelope
B2:​ ​How did Penelope delay from choosing a suitor to marry?
She promised to choose a husband after she finished weaving a tapestry which she unwove
every night
4. Translate the noun phrase “the old farmer” into good Latin. ​senex Agricola
B1: Express “the rather old farmers” in ablative? ​senioribus agricolīs
B2:
Identify the ablative use of “senioribus agricolīs” in following sentence.
Quintus celerius senioribus agricolīs ambulavit
ablative of comparison
5. After a difficult and costly siege lasting eight months, what city, perched on a rocky
plateau, was finally captured by Hannibal in 219 BC? ​Saguntum
B1: The siege of Saguntum was the cause of what war? ​Second Punic War
B2: According to the Romans, the siege of Saguntum violated what treaty of 226 BC?
The Ebro (River) Treaty
6. Give the 1st person plural pluperfect passive indicative of the verb “emo”. ​emptī/ae/a
eramus
B1: What form of the verb “emo” is “emisse”? ​perfect active infinitive
B2:
Identify the use of “emisse” in the following sentence.
Dicit se equum emisse.
infinitive with indirect statement
7. What daughter of the river Peneus fled from the advances of Apollo, and was able to escape
due to a timely transformation into a laurel tree?
Daphne
B1:​ ​Having heard Daphne’s prayers, who caused her transformation into a laurel tree?
Her father (Peneus)

B2:​ ​What diety had inflicted Apollo with his lust for the beautiful maiden?
Cupid (Eros is acceptable)
8. Complete the following analogy. “habeo” is to “habuistis” as “tango” is to what? ​tetigistis
B1:
Change “tetigistis” to 2nd person singular future passive indicative. ​tangēris / tangēre
B2:
Translate the following English sentence into good Latin.
Marcus, don’t touch the dog! ​Marce, noli canem tangere! / Marce, ne canem tangas!
9. What disaster occurred on August 24​th​ 79 AD? ​Eruption of Mt. Vesuvius
B1. Name three cities that were destroyed in the eruption? ​Herculaneum, Pompeii, Stabiae
B2. Whose letters gave an eyewitness account of the eruption? ​Pliny the Younger
10. Which two cases can be used to describe a person or object? ​genitive and ablative
B1. In which two cases does a supine occur?
accusative and ablative
B2:
In which two cases does an indeclinable noun occur? ​nominative and accusative
11. To what mythological group do the following characters belong? Lachesis, Atropos, &
Clotho
The Fates
B1:​ ​Which of​ ​the Fates would spin the thread of life?
Clotho
B2: Which of the Fates would cut the thread?
​Atropos
12. Translate the following Latin verb into good English. munientur
they will be built /
fortified
B1:Translate the following English sentence into good Latin.
The houses will be built by four thousand soldiers.
Domūs ab quattuor milibus militum munientur.
B2:
Translate the following English sentence into good Latin.
The houses will be built in the country. ​Domūs rurī munientur.
13. Which official in Rome was responsible for the state finances? ​Quaestors
B1. Who was appointed in a state of emergency and only served for 6 months? ​Dictator
B2. Which office is the pinnacle of the cursus honorum? ​Consul
14. Which of the following four words has a different Latin root from the rest? creed,
credulous, incredible, crescent.
​crescent
B1: Give the complete form and meaning of Latin root of the following words.
creed, credulous, incredible. ​credo, credere, credidi, creditus/a/um, meaning to believe /
trust
B2:
Translate the following English sentence into good Latin.
He trusted neither of the young men. ​Neutrīs iuvenibus credidit.
15. After the murder of Hector, how many times did Achilles drag his body around the walls of
the city?
Three
B1:​ ​What friend of Achilles had Hector previously killed in combat?
​Patroclus

B2:​ ​Who went to the tent of Achilles as a suppliant to ransom Hector’s body? ​King Priam
16. Translate the following English question into good Latin.
From whom did Daphne run? ​Quo Dephne cucurrit?
B1:
Responde Latine. Quis Phoebum ab Daphne mutando prohibuit? ​Peneus
B2:
Listen carefully again to the Latin question.
Quis Phoebum ab Daphne mutando prohibuit?
What is the ablative use of Daphne?
ablative of separation
17. When was Rome founded? ​April 21​st​ 753 BC
B1. Who was said to be the founder of Rome? ​Romulus
B2. On what hill did Romulus build Rome? ​Palatine
18. Responde Latine. Quis ipsum gladio suo amore puerae Thisbes interfecit? ​Pyramus
B1:Listen carefully again to the Latin question. Quis ipsum gladio suo amore puerae
Thisbes interfecit?
Identify the case and use of amore. ​ablative of cause
B2:
Identify the case and use of puerae.
objective genitive
19. What Greek hero had to perform the following tasks? Clean filthy stables, retrieve an
Amazon’s girdle, retrieve golden apples, and kill the hydra Heracles
B1: Of the previously mentioned labors, for which did Heracles enlist the help of his nephew
Iolaus?
​Killing the Hydra
B2:​ ​What cousin of Heracles was the king who assigned the twelve labors to him? ​Eurystheus
20. Listen to the following Latin passage carefully and then answer a question.
Marcus fabulam de Cinderella puera altissima pulcherrimaque ruri, qua in
agrīs atrocis novercae laborat, scribet. Se hodie septem horas scripturum esse putat.
How will Marcus describe or characterize Cinderella? ​The tallest and most beautiful girl in
the country.
B1:
Listen to the following Latin passage again and then answer questions.
Marcus fabulam de Cinderella altissima pulcherrimaque puera ruri, qua in
agrīs atrocis novercae laborat, scribet. Se hodie septem horas scripturum esse putat.
What is Cinderella doing now? ​She is working in her cruel stepmother’s fields.
B2:
For how long does Marcus think he will be working on the story today?
hours.

For seven

2011 Tennesee Questions—EXTRA QUESTIONS
LANGUAGE:
1. Which of the following five prepositions goes with an accusative?
de, pro, sine, post, prae
post
B1: Which of the following five prepositions can go with either an accusative
or an ablative?
contra, ante, trans, sub, inter ​sub
B2:
Which of the following four verbs does not goes with a genitive?
oblivisci, memini, abuti, accusare ​abuti
2. Which two verbs have the principal part factus/a/um?
Please give their respective first principal part.
facio and fio
B1: Please give the full form and meaning of facio and fio.
facio, facere, feci, factus/a/um, meaning to make / do
fio, fieri, factus/a/um, meaning to happen / become / be made
B2:
Translate the following English sentence into good Latin.
The ships are made of gold.
Naves ex auro fiunt.
3. Find the only ablative in the following Latin sentence.
Marcus celerius multo quam Quintus edit.
multo
B 1: Listen carefully again to the Latin sentence.
Marcus celerius multo quam Quintus edit.
Identify the ablative use of multo. ​ablative of degree of difference
B2:
Translate the following English sentence into good Latin.
Marcus surpasses Quintus in speed.
Marcus Quintum celeritate
vincit.
4. There are three ways of translating “he says” into Latin.
Please give one good Latin translation of “he says”. ​dicit / inquit / ait
B1: Translate “he says” into good Latin in another way. ​dicit / inquit / ait
B2:
Translate “he says” into good Latin in a way different from before. ​dicit / inquit
/ ait
MYTHOLOGY:
1. Whose body was dragged around the walls of his city three times after being killed
in combat by his Greek counterpart Achilles?
Hector
B1: What city had Hector died defending?
Troy
B2:​ ​What father of Hector had been the king of Troy during the fall of the city? Priam
2. What was the name of the three headed watchdog of Hades? Cerberus
B1: Who in the underworld ferried souls across the river Styx?
Charon
B2:​ ​Where in the underworld would you find the souls of sinners?
Tartarus
3. What Thracian musician went to the underworld to bring back his beloved
Eurydice? ​Orpheus

B1:​ ​How did Eurydice die?
​Snake bite
B2:​ ​Why was Eurydice unable to return to the upper realm with Orpheus?
Orpheus disobeyed Hades’ orders by looking back
4. What nymph was transformed into a spring to avoid the advances of an amorous
river god? ​Arethusa
B1:​ ​Who was this ardent river god?
Alpheius
B2: What goddess caused her timely transformation?
​Artemis
HISTORY:
1. What gladiator led a slave revolt from 73-71BC? ​Spartacus
B1. Who was chiefly responsible for the defeat of Spartacus? ​Crassus
B2. What other Roman general attempted to take credit for the defeat of Spartacus?
Pompey
2. Who founded a new city on the site of Byzantium in 324AD? ​Constantine
B1. What city was this? ​Constantinople
B2. What famous victory by Constantine over Maxentius in 312AD did the city
commerorate? ​Milvian Bridge
3. In what modern day country were the cities Deva, Eburacum, and Aquae Sulis
located? ​UK/England
B1. What French city was called Lutetia? ​Paris
B2. What other French city was known as Lugdunum? ​Lyons
4. What city asked Pyrrhus for help against Rome? ​Tarentum
B1. What enemy of Rome captured Tarentum in 213BC? ​Hannibal
B2. The establishment of what major colony in southernmost Italy led to Tarentum’s
decline? ​Brundisium

2011 Tennesee Questions—FINALS
1. Which of the following can be analyzed either as a noun or as a verb?
ager, vīs, diēs, portus
​vīs
B1:
Change vīs to 3rd person singular present active indicative. ​vult
B2:
Translate the following English sentence into good Latin.
I don’t have what he wants. ​Quod vult non habeo.
2. Name the third emperor of Rome. ​Caligula
B1. What were the years of his reign? ​37AD-41AD
B2. Of what relation to Caligula was Claudius, the fourth emperor? ​Uncle
3. Translate the noun phrase “wild animal” into good Latin. ​ferum animal
B1:
Express “ferum animal” in ablative plural. ​ferīs animalibus
B2:
Identify the ablative use of “ferīs animalibus” in following sentence.
Marcus ferīs animalibus qua suos agros deleverunt vescitur.
ablative with special verb / deponent verb / vescor
4. What Athenian champion killed the Minotaur and rescued Ariadne from the
Labyrinth? ​Theseus
B1: Who built the Labyrinth?
Daedalus
B2: On what island did Theseus abandon Ariadne after escaping the Labyrinth?
Naxos
5. Translate and spell out the verb “has gone” in good Latin. ​iit / ivit
B1:
Translate the noun phrase “the same chief” into good Latin. ​idem princeps
B2:
Translate the following English sentence into good Latin.
Julia said that the same chief had gone to Rome on foot.
Julia eundem principem Romam pede isse / ivisse dixit.
6. Who was emperor at the time of the Great Fire in Rome? ​Nero
B1. In what year did this occur? ​64AD
B2. What palace did Nero build in an area cleared by the Great Fire?​ Domus Aurea
7. Which of the following words has a different Latin root from the rest?
election, legacy, delegation, legislation
​election
B1:
The Latin root of election is lego, legere, meaning to read.
Please give the 3rd​ ​person plural perfect active indicative of lego. ​lēgērunt / lēgēre
(might be seen in poetry)
B2:
Grammatically, legam can be translated in two different ways depending
on the context. One of the translations is let me read.
What is the other correct translation of legam? ​I will read.
8. What Trojan hero was the son of Anchises and Venus?

Aeneas

B1:​ ​During the sack of Troy, Aeneas was separated from his wife, who ended up getting
left behind in the turmoil. Who was this unfortunate spouse?
Creusa
B2:​ ​With what Carthaginian queen does Aeneas have a “romance” while on his way to
Italy? ​Dido
9. Responde Latine. Quid equo creto sanguine Medusae nomen est? ​Pegasus
B1:
Listen carefully again to the Latin question.
Quid equo creto sanguine Medusae nomen est?
Identify the case and use of equo. ​dative of possession
B2:
Identify the case and use of sanguine. ​ablative of origin / source
10. Which member of the Second Triumvirate lost the Battle of Actium? ​Marc Antony
B1. Which member of the Second Triumvirate lived the longest? ​Octavian/Augustus
B2. Which member ruled the east? ​Antony
11. Complete the following analogy.
“gestus” is to “gesseras” as “status” is to what? ​steteras
B1:
Complete the following analogy.
“ibat” is to “iit” as “poterat” is to what? ​potuit
B2:
Complete the following analogy.
“eris” is to “fore” as “feres” is to what? ​laturus/a/um esse
12. Which of the following was not an Olympian God? Jupiter, Mars, Minerva, Pluto
​Pluto
B1:​ ​Where would you find the god Pluto?
The underworld (Tartarus)
B2:​ ​Which of the deities listed in the toss-up was associated with wisdom?
Minerva
13. What type of verb is orior? ​deponent verb
B1:
What type of verb is coepi? ​defective verb
B2:
What type of verb is licet? ​impersonal verb
14. Who built the Pantheon in 27BC? ​Agrippa
B1. What was the term for men like Agrippa who were the first in their family to
become consul? ​Novus Homo
B2. From where did Cicero and Marius, two other novi homines, originate? ​Arpinum

15. Responde Latine.
Quot mala aurea Hippomeni muneri Venus dedit? ​tria
B1:
Listen carefully again to the Latin question.

Quot mala aurea Hippomeni muneri Venus dedit?
Identify the case and use of Hippomeni. ​dative of indirect object
B2:
Identify the case and use of muneri. ​dative of purpose
16. What goddess invented the flute, but threw it away because it distorted her
features?
​Athena
B1:​ ​What Satyr found the discarded flute and proceeded to challenge Apollo to a music
contest? ​Marsyas
B2:​ ​After winning the contest, how did Apollo punish Marsyas for his insolence?
Flayed him alive
17. Responde Latine. Num canis immortalis es? ​Non sum.
B1:
Translate the following English question into good Latin.
Bacchus was an immortal god, wasn’t he? ​Nonne Bacchus deus immortalis fuit?
B2:
Listen carefully to the following Latin sentence.
Nisi dormītis, stāte! ​All players should stand up unless they are taking a nap ​☺
18. What battle ended the Second Punic War? ​Zama
B1. What battle ended the First Punic War? ​Aegates Islands
B2. At what other First Punic War battle did Claudius Pulcher throw the sacred
chickens overboard? ​Drepana
19. Listen to the following Latin passage carefully and then answer a question.
Marcus fabulam de Cinderella quam nunc non iam suo amore deorum
amat scribebat. Atrox Cinderella Marci domum it et miserum puerum
sandalio aureo magno gaudio interficit.
Why is Marcus no longer in love with Cinderella now? ​Because of his love for gods.
B1:
Listen to the following Latin passage again and then answer questions.
Marcus fabulam de Cinderella quam nunc non iam suo amore deorum
amat scribebat. Atrox Cinderella Marci domum it et miserum puerum
gladio aureo magno gaudio interficit.
To which place does Cinderella go? ​To Marcus’ house.
B2: How does Cinderella feel when she kills Marcus with a golden sandal? ​With great
joy. (Very happy)
20. What fisherman discovered a chest in the water which contained the infant
Perseus and his mother Danae?
Dictys
B1:​ ​In an attempt to court Danae, how does King Polydectes try to get rid of Perseus?
He sends Perseus on a quest to bring back the head of Medusa

B2:​ ​Upon returning to Seriphos with the head of Medusa, Perseus comes across an
Ethiopian maiden whom he saves from a sea monster. Who was this daughter of
Cepheus & Cassiopeia? ​Andromeda

