2012 North Carolina Junior Classical League Regional Certamen Advanced Questions
ROUND 1
TU1: Which of the following 4 words does not derive from caput?
capitulate, capture, cap, capitol
B1: What derivative of caput means to "review by a brief summary"? recapitulate
B2: What derivative of caput means a chief or leader?
captain
TU2: Who was Hector's wife?
Andromache
B1: What was the name of Hector's son? Astyanax
B2: Who did Andromache eventually marry after the Trojan war had ended? Helenus
TU3: What man revolutionized the Roman army and was elected consul an unprecedented
7 times?
Marius
B1: Of what nephew of Marius did Sulla say that there were "many Mariuses" in him?
Julius Caesar
B2: What office did Sulla revive, which had not been used since the Punic Wars?
dictator
TU4: What crossdresser was ripped apart by his female family members?
B1: Who was Pentheus' grandfather?
Cadmus
B2: What god was responsible for Pentheus' fate?
Dionysus

Pentheus

TU5: Translate the following: nescio cūr Rōmam cucurrerim.
I don't know why I ran to Rome.
B1: What tense is cucurrerim?
perfect
B2: Why is cucurrerim subjunctive?
indirect question
SCORE CHECK
TU6: What tenses of the subjunctive are possible in a purpose clause?
present and imperfect
B1: What tenses of the subjunctive are possible in a result clause?
present and imperfect
B2: What tenses of the subjunctive are possible in an indirect question?
present, imperfect, perfect, pluperfect
TU7: Who wrote the Fasti?
Ovid
B1: What was the name of Ovid's letters from female heroes?
Heroidum
B2: In what meter were both the Fasti and the Heroides?

Heroides / Epistulae
elegiac couplets

TU8: Which of the following 5 works is not written in dactylic hexameter?
Ennius' Annales, Statius' Thebaid, Lucretius' De Rerum Natura, Ovid's Amores, Vergil's
Aeneid.
B1: Who wrote the Pharsalia, another work in dactylic hexameter?
Lucan
B2: Between which two great men was the war portrayed in Pharsalia?
Julius Caesar and Pompey
TU9: What noun is the adverb comminus, which means "hand-to-hand," derived from?
manus
B1: What gender is manus?
feminine
B2: What declension is manus?
4th
SCORE CHECK
TU10: Who was the 6th king of Rome?
Servius Tullius
B1: What queen, the wife of the 5th king of Rome, raised Servius Tullius?
B2: What omen had caused her to do so?
His head had caught on fire without hurting him as an infant.

Tanaquil

ROUND 2
TU1: what type of condition is the following: sī tū adessēs, gaudērēs?
present contrary-to-fact
B1: Translate that sentence.
If you were here, you would rejoice/be rejoicing
B2: Change the Latin phrase into a past contrary-to-fact condition.
sī tū adfuissēs, gavīsus essēs
TU2: Say in Latin: "I greet the rising sun."
B1: Say in Latin: "The sun rose today."
B2: Say in Latin: "I trust the rising sun."

salūtō sōlem orientem
sōl hodiē ortus est.
sōlī orientī crēdō.

TU3: Name the only Roman god whose name starts with a Q. Quirinus
B1: Name the mountain deity whose name starts with a T.
Tmolus
B2: What is the name of the creature whose cows Hercules stole?
Geryon
TU4: What was the name of the she-goat that raised baby Zeus?
B1: Who was the eldest of the siblings that Kronos swallowed?
incorrect)
B2: Who was the youngest?
Zeus

Amaltheia
Hestia ("Vesta" is

TU5: What usage of the subjunctive is in the following sentence: Quid dīcam?
deliberative
B1: Translate the sentence.
What shall/should I say?
B2: What tense is dīcam?
present
SCORE CHECK
TU6: The inscription on the Pantheon says that who built it in his third consulship?
Marcus Agrippa
B1: What emperor rebuilt the Pantheon as we see it today?
Hadrian
B2: Marcus Agrippa famously took a boat through Rome's sewer on an inspection. What
was the sewer called in Latin?
Cloaca Maxima
TU7: What was the name of Cicero's best friend, to whom he wrote many letters?
Atticus
B1: Cicero also wrote many letters to his own brother. What was his name?
Quintus
B2: A third collection of Cicero's letters bears the name of which man, who was one of the
assassins of Julius Caesar?
Brutus

TU8: Translate the following: mīlitēs vēnērunt pugnātum.
The soldiers came to fight.
B1: Grammatically speaking, what is pugnātum?
a(n) (accusative) supine (of purpose)
B2: The above example contains an accusative supine. What other case can the supine be
in?
ablative
TU9: What emperor is sometimes referred to as "The Apostate"?
Julian
B1: Julian's wife, Helena, was the daughter of what emperor?
Constatine
B2: Whom did Constantine defeat at the battle of the Milvian bridge in 312 CE?
Maxentius
SCORE CHECK
TU10: What satirist is responsible for the phrase we translate as "a sound mind in a sound
body"?
Juvenal
B1: What is the Latin phrase?
mens sana in corpore sano.
B2: Translate this famous phrase of Juvenal's: quis cusodiet custodes ipsos?
Who will watch the watchmen (themselves)?
(or variations thereof, but it has to be future tense)

ROUND 2
TU1: How many of the 12 Olympians have planets named after them?
5 (Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Neptune)
B1&2: For both bonuses, name two of the moons of Jupiter that are named after his human
lovers.
Io, Europa, Ganymede
TU2: Translate the following: vincī possum.
B1: Give the voice and mood of the word vincī.
B2: Say in Latin: "I am trying to be loved."

I can/am able to be defeated.
passive infinitive
temptō/conor amārī.

TU3: Translate the following: "discipulī, sedēte!"
B1: In what case is the word discipulī?
B2: What is the singular present imperative form of loquor?

students, sit!
Vocative
loquere

TU4: Which emperor conquered Dacia?
Trajan
B1: Trajan's market, which were built with the proceeds from the Dacian campaign, was
built into the side of which of the 7 hills of Rome?
Quirinal
B2: What new complex had Trajan's markets on one end and Trajan's column at the
opposite end?
Trajan's Forum
TU5: When recognized by the moderator, follow these instructions: circumspice et tolle
manūs.
student should look around and raise their hands.
B1: Now, sedēte in mēnsam et rīdite.
students should sit on table and laugh/smile
B2: Now, duo discipulī, stāte et amplectiminī.
Two students should stand and hug.
SCORE CHECK
TU6: Which work of Julius Caesar's describes his war against Pompet?
(Commentarii) de Bello Civile
B1&2: For both bonuses, name two of the other works of Caesar.
de bello gallico/alexandrino/africo/hispaniensi
TU7: What sylvan god has a modern musical instrument named after him? Pan
B1: What was the name of the nymph who was turned into the reeds used to make the Pan
flute in order to escape Pan's desirous clutches?
Syrinx
B2: What is the name of the native region, which starts with an A, of both Pan and Syrinx?
Arcadia
TU8: What uncle/nephew pair both witnessed the eruption of Mt. Vesuvius?
Pliny the Elder and the Younger
B1: Which one survived?
The Younger
B2: Who was Pliny the younger writing to in the letter describing the eruption of Vesuvius?
Tacitus

TU9: Who killed Nero?
He committed suicide (with the help of a slave)
B1: Name one of the ways that Nero attempted to kill his mother, but failed.
collapsible boat, roof cave in on bedroom
B2: Nero's mother told the soldiers who were sent to kill her to stab her in a specific place.
Where was this?
the womb
SCORE CHECK
TU10: What do the following verbs have in common? nocēre, minārī, imperāre, crēdere,
favēre.
they take the dative
B1: Besides being deponent, what do the following verbs have in common? vescī, potī, fungī
they take the ablative
B2: What do the following verbs have in common? oblivīscī, meminisse, potīrī
they take the genitive

