Round 1 Novice Level
1. They arranged to meet at the tomb of Ninus, but didn’t arrive at the same time. They
also inspired Shakespeare’s characters Romeo and Juliet. Who were these Babylonian
lovers?
Pyramus & Thisbe
-B1. Why does Pyramus commit suicide?
He thinks Thisbe has been killed by a lion
-B2. What transformation is a memorial to their tragic deaths? Mulberries become red
2. While trying to write these fantastic questions for you, my attention kept wandering to
the television. Jack Bower trying to save the world from diaster. Of course Jack Bower is
the star of the television show 24. What would the Romans have called this show?
Quattuorviginti
-B1. After 24, another show came on, which the Romans may have called Ossa. What do
we call this TV show?
Bones
-B2. I then became bored and switched the channel to another show that the Romans may
have called Amissus. What do we call this show?
Lost
3. For what purpose would a Roman stand on the Rostra?
-B1. For what official purpose would certain citizens gather at the Curia?

To speak

Senate Meeting
-B2. For what official purpose would Roman citizens gather at the Comitium?
To vote
4. Give the accusative singular of: summus mons.
-B1. Give the nominative plural of: fessus iuvenis.
-B2. Give the dative singular of: rex mortuus.

Summum montem
Fessi iuvenes
Regi mortuo

5. What derivative of verto, vertere is an adjective meaning ‘at right angles to the
horizon’?
Vertical
-B1. What derivative of lavo, lavare is an adjective meaning ‘extravagant’?
Lavish
-B2. What derivative of tollo, tollere is a verb meaning ‘to praise lavishly’?
Extol
6. Which of the great heroes in mythology wore a lion’s skin and carried a club?
-B1. Where had Hercules killed this lion with it’s invulnerable hide?
-B2. What unusual tool did Hercules use to skin the lion?

Heracles
Nemea
It’s own claws

7. If you were a Roman miser, would you prefer a quadrans, SESTERTIUS, or an as?
-B1. What coin was the equivalent of four sestertii?
Denarius
-B2. Of what metal were the sestertius and denarius made?
Silver

8. Name in order the first 3 kings of Rome.
Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Tullus Hostilius
-B1. According to tradition, which of them destroyed Alba Longa?
Tullus Hostilius
-B2. Who, for a time, was co-ruler with Romulus?
Titus Tatius
9. Translate this sentence into English: Servus, qui in equo sedebat, dormire non poterat.
The slave who was sitting on the horse was not able to sleep
-B1. Translate this sentence into English: Princeps, quod erat iratissimus, senatores
timidos dimisit.
The Emperor, because he was very angry, dismissed the fearful senators
-B2. Translate this sentence into English: In theatro erant multi auctores, quos spectatores
plaudebant. In the theater there were many actors whom the spectators applauded
10. I was the first mortal to commit murder, I offended Zeus by trying to kidnap Hera,
and then in the underworld I was punished by being bound to a fiery wheel in the
underworld. Who am I?
Ixion
-B1. Who is punished in the underworld by not being able to drink the water or eat the
fruit that is hung in front of him?
Tantalus
-B2. Who must push a huge rock continuously up a massive hill only to have it roll to the
bottom once he gets to the top?
Sisyphus
11. Give an antonym for lente:
-B1. Give an antonym for heri:
-B2. Give an antonym for nunc:

Celeriter
Cras (accept Hodie)
Tum, Deinde

12. Listen carefully to the sentence and answer the question about it in Latin.
Quintus, postquam flores pulchros viderat, e horto properavit. Unde Quintus properavit?
E horto
-B1. Quando e horto properavit?
Postquam flores (pulchros) viderat
-B2. Quales flores viderat?
Pulchros
13. Which of the Nereids was destined to bear a son mightier than his father, who later
was married to Peleus?
Thetis
-B1. Which of the Nereids was the wife of Poseidon?
Amphitrite
-B2. Which of the Nereids was loved by the Cyclops Polyphemus?
Galatea
14. What is the name given to the system created by Diocletian in which the Empire was
ruled by two Augusti and two Caesars?
Tetrarchy
-B1. Name one of the first two Augusti.
Diocletian or Maximian
-B2. Name one of the first two Caesars.
Constantius or Galerius

15. Which of the following does not share the same Latin root as the others?
Junior Juncture Juvenal Rejuvenate Juvenile
-B1. Which of the following does not share the same Latin root as the others?
Canteen Accent Cantor Enchant Canto
-B2. Which of the following does not share the same Latin root as the others?
Lecture Legend Lesson Elegant Legal
16. In what province of Rome were the cities of Capua, Neopolis, and Pompeii?
Campania
Hand out the visuals and allow them a few moments to look it over
-B1. What letter labels the province of Campania?
Letter I
-B2. What is the name of the province marked with the letter O?
Eturia
17. What kind of ablative is illustrated in this sentence: Animal vinculis tenebunt.
Means/Instrument
-B1. What kind of ablative is illustrated in this sentence: Una hora incipiet. Time When
-B2. What kind of ablative is illustrated in this sentence: Ea causa te timeo.
Cause
18. Differentiate between novus and notus:
-B1. Differentiate between liber and līber:
-B2. Differentiate between moneo and maneo:

Novus-new, notus-known(famous)
Liber-book, līber-free
Moneo-to warn, maneo- to remain

19. Which of the Olympian gods was born on the island of Crete?
-B1. Who designed and built the labyrinth on the island of Crete?
-B2. Who captured the Cretan bull and took it to mainland Greece?

Zeus/Juppiter
Daedalus
Heracles/Hercules

20. Earlier this year I had several students ask me for college recommendations, one of
them needed a letter sent to John Hopkins University. The motto at that school is ‘veritas
vos liberabit’. Translate that into English for me.
The truth will set you free
-B1. Another student needed a letter sent to Brown University. Their motto is ‘In Deo
speramus’. Translate that into English.
In god we trust
-B2. Yet another student needed a letter sent to the University of Missouri. Their motto is
‘salus populi’. Translate that into English.
The welfare of the people

Round 2 Novice Level
1. Who was exiled in 58 BC for executing Roman citizens without a trial?
Cicero
-B1. Name the tribune who secured Cicero’s exile.
Clodius
-B2. Whom had Cicero executed without a trial?
Co-conspirators of Catiline
2. Which divinity saw the abduction of Persephone by Hades?
Helios/Apollo
-B1. What divinity had heard the screams of Persephone?
Hecate
-B2. What divinity convinces Demeter to accept Zeus’ plan for the sharing of
Persephone?
Rhea
3. From what Latin noun do derive the word “price”?
-B1. From what Latin noun do we derive the word “prize”?
-B2. From what Latin noun do we derive the word “praise”?

Pretium
Pretium
Pretium

4. Instead of writing certamen questions, I decided to take a trip to my local blockbuster,
but once I there all the movie titles magically turned into Latin. What movie would
normal people have seen if they were looking at a movie titled MCDVIII?
1408
-B1. The next movie I saw was ‘Regnum’ what movie would you have seen?
The Kingdom
-B2. The next movie I saw was a sports comedy titled ‘Pilae Furoris,’ what movie did the
normal person next to me see?
Balls of Fury
5. Even after I had watched a movie and was still unable to actually write any questions I
decided to read a magazine. In the back I found my horoscope. If like me, you were born
between February 19th and March 20th you would be a Pisces. What is the English
meaning of this Latin noun?
Fish
-B1. If you were born between November 22 and December 21, then you are a
Sagittarius. What is the English meaning of this Latin noun?
Archer
-If you were born between May 21 and June 20, then you are a Gemini. What is the
English meaning of this Latin noun?
Twin
6. What is the use of the accusative in this sentence? Hercules multos annos laborat.
Accusative duration of time
-B1. What is the use of the accusative in this sentence? In via milites decem milia
ambulaverunt.
Accusative extent of space
-B2. In arenam gladiatores curcurrerant.
Accusative place to which OR Object of a preposition

7. Acer is to acriter as liber is to what?
-B1. Brevis is to breviter as facile is to what?
-B2. Bonus is bene as magnus is to what?

Libere
Facile
Magnopere

8. Who was the famous Greek musician who lost his wife on their wedding day?
Orpheus
-B1. How did his wife, Eurydice, die the first time?
Bitten by a snake
-B2. How did Orpheus lose her the second time?
He looked back at her while returning from the underworld
9. Who, on becoming emperor in AD 193, disbanded the Praetorian Guard because of it’s
involvment in the murder of Pertinax?
Septimius Severus
-B1. Septimius Severus was the first emperor from what province?
Africa
-B2. Name of his joint heirs.
Caracalla or Geta
10. It was considered the navel of the world after two eagles released by Zeus crossed
over this place; it then became a sanctuary to Apollo?
Delphi
-B1. What was the name given to the prophetess at Delphi who uttered the oracles?
Pythia
-B2. On what did the Pythia sit?
Tripod
11. In a typical Roman domus, what were the terms given to both the opening in which
rain water was funneled through and the tank which collected the fresh rainwater?
Impluvium & Compluvium
Hand out the visuals and allow them a few moments to look it over
-B1. What is the term given to the areas marked A?
Tabernae
-B2. Which area is marked with the letter C?
Atrium
12.After being called upon, perform the following command: Sta atque salta
Student stands and dances
-B1. Optime, nunc state et plaudite.
All teamates stand and clap
-B2. Nunc, sedete et gemite
All students sit and groan
13. I was cursed by Myrtilus as he was falling to his death. My father Tantalus tried to
serve me to the gods as dinner, Demeter took a bite of me, and the gods replaced my
shoulder with ivory. Who am I?
Pelops
-B1. What had Myrtilus helped Pelops to do?
Defeat Oenomaus in a chariot race to win Hippodamia
-B2. Name one of the two sons of Pelops.
Atreus, Thyestes

14. Give the nominative plural of genus barbarum.
-B1. Give the ablative singular of spes omnis.
-B2. Give the dative plural of filia vestra.

Genera Barbara
Spe omni
Filiabus vestris

15. Translate into Latin the prepositional phrase in this sentence: The emperor was
traveling with many friends.
Cum multis amicis
-B1. Translate into Latin the prepositional phrase in this sentence: The diver plunged into
the deep sea.
In altum mare
-B2. Translate into Latin the prepositional phrase in this sentence: The slave testified on
behalf of his master.
Pro suo domino
16. How would a Roman who did not want to walk travel across the city, since the city
was closed to carriage traffic during the day?
Litter or Sedan Chair
-B1. Most people traveling out of Rome would ride on a mule or in a carriage. Name a
type of two-wheeled carriage.
Cisium, Essedum, Carpentum
-B2. Name a four-wheeled carriage.
Raeda, Petorritum, Pilentum, Carruca
17. If a traveler set off west from Brundisium to Pompeii, which mountian range would
he have to travel through?
Apennines
-B1. If a traveler were to set off north from Tarraco in Hispania, to Narbo in Gallia,
which mountain range would he have to travel across?
Pyrennes
-B2. If a traveler were to set off from Genua in Gallia to Mediolanum in Italia, which
mountain range would he have to cross?
Alps
18. Make quattuor agree with the Latin noun: dominorum.
-B1. Make unus agree with servi.
-B2. Make duo agree with pueris.

Quattuor
Unius
Duobus

19. If these questions are to hard, I will attempt to elucidate them. According to it’s Latin
root, what does the word elucidate mean?
To make clear
-B1. Sometimes the questions may seem malicious, but I assure you they are not.
According to it’s Latin root, what does the word malicious mean?
(full of) Evil
-B2. If you think these questions are hard, the ones I have prepared for the finals may
appear insuperable. Again according to it’s Latin root, what does the word insuperable
mean?
Unconquerable
20. Who was the son of Aphrodite and Anchises?
Aeneas
-B1. Who had caused Aphrodite to fall in love with the mortal Anchises?
Zeus
-B2. Why had he done this?
So that she would experience what she was putting others through

Round 3 Novice Level
1. Translate the following into English: Tres milites de monte in castra cucurrerunt.
Three soldiers ran down the mountian into the camp
-B1. Do the same with this sentence: Romam ire cupimus.
We want to go to Rome
-B2. Do the same with this sentence :Ex porta magno timore ambulabat.
He was walking out of the gate with great fear
2. What was the tragic mistake of of Phaethon?
-B1. What was the tragic mistake of Icarus?
-B2. What was the tragic mistake of Semele?

Asked to drive the chariot of the sun
OR lost control of the chariot
Flew to close to the sun
Asked to see Zeus in his true form

3. According to tradition, who built the first wall around part or all of Rome?
-B1. On what hill did Romulus establish his walled settlement?
-B2. What political institution did Romulus create as a council of elders?

Romulus
Palatine
Senate

4. What derivative of ‘vestis’ is a noun meaning “the act of committing money in order to
gain profit”?
Investment
-B1. What derivative of ordo is an adjective meaning “normal or usual”?
Ordinary
-B2. What derivative of ubi is an adjective meaning “seeming to be everywhere at the
same time”?
Ubiquitous
5. Whose father gave his name to the Aegean Sea?
-B1. Whose son gave his name to the Icarian Sea?
-B2. Whose sister gave her name to the Hellespont?

Theseus’
Daedalus’
Phrixus’

6. Speaking of those same seas, give the land masses that lie to the west, east, and south
of the Aegean Sea?
W-Greece, E- Asia Minor, S-Crete
-B1. Which island is closet to the Icarian Sea?
Cyprus Crete Sicily Corsica Britain
-B2. Which region of Greece lies to the north of the Hellespont?
Thrace Thessaly Arcadia
7. Name the emperor whose memory was damned by the senate and the people after his
assassination on the last day of AD 192.
Commodus
-B1. Commodus had regarded himself as the human manifestation of what mythical
hero/god?
Hercules
-B2. In the year following Commodus’ assassination, there were three men recognized as
emperor. Name one of them.
Pertinax, Didius Iulianus, Septimius Severus

8. After I read that magazine with the horoscopes in it, I turned to a newspaper to keep
from writing these questions. The first section I picked up was the travel section. The
front page talked about how nice North Carolina was. It reminded me of the Latin motto
of North Carolina, ‘Esse quam videri’, what does that mean in English?
To be rather than to seem
-B1. The next page had pictures of South Carolina, which reminded me of it’s motto
‘Dum spiro, spero’. Which in English means what?
While I breathe I hope
-B2. The last page I looked at was offering time share in Arizona, and that of course
reminded me of their motto, ‘Ditat Deus’, which means what in English? God enriches
9. Even after procrastinating writing these questions with TV, magazines, and the
newspaper, I still couldn’t foucs on my computer screen and my eyes drifted to the
bookshelf, where some Charles Dickens novels sat. The first one I saw was ‘Hard Times’
What would Dickens have called this book if he were an ancient Roman? Dura Tempora
-B1. Still pretending that Dickens was an ancient Roman, what would he have called his
other book, A Tale of Two Cities?
Fabula duae urbis
-B2. If an ancient Roman were reading a Dickens book that was called ‘Magnae
Exspectationes,’ what would we call it?
Great Exspectations
10. What kind of ablative is used in the following sentence? Venite mecum, pueri!
Accompaniment
-B1. What kind of ablative is used in the following sentence? Sum libera curis.
Seperation
-B2. What kind of ablative is used in the following sentence? Magna ira audivi.
Manner
11. Of course we all know that Hercules carried a club but which other hero was
commonly seen carrying a club, while he completed his labors?
Theseus
Hand out the visuals and allow them a few moments to look it over
-B1.Which hero is labeled B?
Perseus
-B2. Which letter labels the hero Odysseus?
E
12. What did the lower classes in Rome often do to insure that they would receive a
proper funeral?
Join a burial/funeral club
-B1. The club often had its own burial chamber where urns holding the ashes of the
deceased were stored. What was this kind of chamber called?
Columbarium
-B2. According to law, where were the last rites, whether burial or cremation, held?
Outside of the city walls (pomerium)
13. Differentiate between ‘cena’ and ‘cera’
-B1. Differentiate beteween ‘laetus’ and ‘lectus’
-B2. Differentiate between ‘res’ and ‘rex’

Cena-dinner, cera-wax
Laetus-happy, lectus-couch
Res-thing, rex-king

14. Give the first person singular, future, active, indicative form of the verb gero gerere.
Geram
-B1. Make Geram pluperfect.
Gesseram
-B2. Make Gesseram passive.
Gestus(a) eram
15. Which of the following does not have the same Latin root as the other words?
Pedal Pedestrian Pedigree Peddler Biped
-B1. Which of the following does not have the same Latin root as the other words?
Ferment Suffer Fertile Offer Vociferate
-B2. Which of the following does not have the same Latin root as the other words?
Force Comfort Foray Fortissimo Effort
16. Which hero was the son of Zeus and Danae?
Perseus
-B1. Why did Danae’s father lock her away from all potential suitors?
It had been prophesized that his grandson would kill him
-B2. How did Zeus manage to reach Danae?
Gold rain(shower)
17. In the Republic, how could a Roman send a letter to a friend?
By messenger
Or with travelers or traders
-B1. Notes and short letters were usually written on ‘tabellae’. What were tabellae?
Wax tablets
-B2. On what were longer and more important communications written on?
Papyrus
18. Give a synonym for: ostendo
-B1. Give a synonym for: urbs
-B2. Give a synonym for: propinquus

Demonstro
Oppidum
Finitimus

19. With patience, he works with a stick in the fields with father. Translate into Latin:
with father.
Cum patre
-B1. Translate: with a stick
Baculo
-B2. Translate: with patience
Cum patientia
20. Who fulfilled the curse of Pelops when he killed an old man at the juncture of three
roads, and then later married his own mother?
Oedipus
-B1. Who was Oedipus’ father?
Laius
-B2. How had Laius tried to avoid Pelops’ curse?
Exposed Oedipus at birth

Final Round Novice Level
1. All Federal Reserve Notes are stamped with ‘The United States of America.’ If
Romans had issued bills, what most likely would they have been stamped with? SPQR
-Congratulations for getting the first question in this final round correct. For your
achievement you have won 4 one dollar bills.
Hand out bills.
Actually I’m kidding, they are only the visual for this question.
-B1. Translate into English the motto that is above the pyramid.
He has approved our undertakings
-B2. Give the Roman numeral for the year in which those bills were issued.
MCMXCIX
2. Originally terminating at Capua, it eventually connected Rome to the western port of
Brundisium. What is this “Regina Viarum” called?
Via Appia
-B1. What was the name of the military road that ran along the west coast of Italy
towards Gaul?
Via Aurelia
-B2. What was the name of the road that led northeast to Umbria?
Via Flaminia
3. For what crime did Heracles perform his twelve labors? Killing his wife and children
-B1. Who had sent him the madness which caused him to commit such a crime?
Hera
-B2. For whom did Heracles perform these twelve labors?
King Eurytheus
4. Nihil, Nihil, Septem, might have been what the Romans would have called the action
hero we so know as 007. Put this James Bond film title into Latin. Never say never again.
Numquam dic numquam iterum
-B1. Translate from Latin this James Bond title: Cras numquam moritur
Tomorrow never dies
-B2. Put this James Bond title into Latin: Golden-Eye
Aureus Oculus
5. What is the use of the dative in this sentence? Villa propinqua mari mea est.
With special adjectives
-B1. What is the use of the dative in this sentence? Servus dominae celeriter respondit.
Indirect object OR after intransitive verb
-B2. What is the use of the dative in this sentence? Mihi nomen est.
Possession
6. What hero was fated to die when a certain log burned?
-B1. By whom was this log burned?
-B2. Why did she do this?

Meleager
His mother (Althaea)
He had killed her brothers

7. Name the grandsons of Scipio Africanus who tried to help the poor by instituting land
reform.
Tiberius & Gaius Gracchus
-B1. What office did the Gracchi brothers hold while trying to secure their reforms?
Tribune
-B2. Which of the brothers set up a land comission in 133 BC to redistribute the ager
publicus or public land?
Gaius
8. If you think these questions stink, you can speak to me after the competition to
ameliorate them yourselves. According to its Latin root, what does the word ameliorate
mean?
To make better
-B1. Honestly, if your cupidity to write better questions is that great, then I say, “Do it
yourself!” According to it’s Latin root, what does the word cupidity mean?
Desire
-B2. If it were up to me any student who answers incorrectly would be subject to corporal
punishment. According to it’s Latin root, what does the word corporal mean?
Bodily
9. Translate ‘her’ into Latin from this sentence: The slave women fixed her hair.
-B1. Translate ‘her’ into Latin from this sentence: We will eat with her.
-B2. Translate ‘her’ into Latin from this sentence: She will eat her own food.

Eius
Ea
Suum

10. Translate into Latin the following sentence: Today, the boys are not able to carry the
heavy swords.
Hodie pueri graves(is) gladios portare non possunt
-B1. Translate into Latin the following sentence: Yesterday, the pretty girls were sitting
near the cool river.
Heri puellae pulchrae ad frigidum flumen sedebant
-B2. Translate into Latin the following sentence: Tomorrow, the father will give a rose to
the mother.
Cras pater matri rosam dabit
11. Who became the constellation Ursa Major, after Zeus turned her into a Bear? Callisto
-B1. Whose dog became the constellation Sirius?
Orion’s
-B2. Whose crown became the constellation Corona?
Ariadne’s
12. What was the commission of ten men empowered to do in 451 BC?
Draw up a code of written laws
-B1. What were the members of this commision called?
Decemviri
-B2. Who was the only person to serve on the comission in 450 and 451?
Appius Claudius
13. Define the following words: mons, mors, and mox
-B1. Define the following words: tum, dum, and cum
-B2. Define the following words: mens, mensa, mensis

Mountain, death, soon
Then, while, with(when)
Mind, table, month

14. What happened when Odysseus’ men ate the lotus?
They forgot their home and comrades
-B1. What happened when Odysseus’ men opened the sack given to them by Aeolus?
They were blown back to where they had been
-B2. Why did the last of Odysseus’ men perish?
Ate the cattle of Helios
15. Clamo is to clamor as audeo is to what?
-B1. Dedo is to deditio as cupio is to what?
-B2. Doleo is to Dolor as specio to what?

Audacia
Cupiditas
Species

16. For what common purpose did Romans use ‘tali’ and ‘tesserae’? Gambling/Games
-B1. Gambling was forbidden in Rome except during what festival?
Saturnalia
-B2. What was celebrated at Saturnalia?
Sowing of the crops
17. In what would a Roman store his clothing, jewelry, money, or papers for safe
keeping?
Arca
-B1. In what room of the house was an ‘arca’ made like a strongbox, often chained to the
floor?
Tablinum
-B2. What is the modern equivalent of an ‘armaria’?
Cabinet/Chest of drawers
18. I had such a hard time writing these questions, and it was so late at night that I
thought I might be able to use something from my medicine cabinet to help stay awake.
The first bottle I picked up had the abbreviation t.i.d.. What should I do with that
particular prescription?
Take it three times a day
-B1. The next prescription had the abbreviation H.S. When should I take this? At bedtime
-B2. The last prescription said that it was a placebo. What is that? Contains no medicine
19. Which Roman god of fertility and agriculture did the Greeks identify as Cronus?
Saturn
-B1. Who was the wife of Saturn?
Ops (or Lua)
-B2. Which king of Latium was a descendant of Saturn?
Latinus
20. From what Latin noun do we derive the English word ‘celestial’?
Caelum
-B1. From what two Latin words do we derive the English word ‘constellation’?
Cum & Stella
-B2. From what two Latin words do we derive the ‘universe’?
Unus & Verto

