•

2009 IJCL

1: What does the word ‘tantalize’ mean?
B1: What does the word ‘sisyphean’ mean?
B2: What does the word ‘icarian’ mean?

Round 1
Hold out of reach, tempt (accept similar)
Labored/difficult(accept similar)
Inventive(accept similar)

2: Give the nominative plural form of pons, pontis
B1: Give the ablative plural form of filia, filiae
B2: Give the genitive plural form of hostis, hostis

Pontes
Filiabus
Hostium

3: What leader was trapped in a cave by the Cyclops, Polyphemus?
B1: Who killed the fire-breathing giant, Cacus, in a cave?
B2: What couple was driven into a cave during a storm, while hunting?

Odysseus
Hercules
Aeneas & Dido

4: Which two experienced Roman generals clashed over the command against
Mithridates?
Marius & Sulla
B1: To which of the two was the command first given by the senate?
Sulla
B2: When the tribune Sulpicius Rufus had the command transferred to Marius by the
concilium plebis, what did Sulla do?
Marched on Rome with his army
5: Ecce Romani is the title of a popular Latin textbook. What is the case of the noun in
that title?
Nominative
B1: Change the title to the singular.
Ecce Romanus
B2: The textbook was originally published in Scotland. What did the Romans call the
area we know as ‘Scotland’?
Caledonia
6: Listen carefully to the following paragraph, which I will read twice, then answer in
Latin the questions that follow.
Olim erat vir Romanus, Appius Claudius nomine. Magnum et longum
aquaeductum aedificavit. Romani aquaeductum ab nomine Appii apellaverunt.
Aquaeductus bonam aquam in urbem Romam portavit.
Question
Quid Appius aedificavit?
B1: Qualem aquaeductum Appius aedificavit?
B2: Quid aquaeductus portavit?

Aquaeductum
Magnum et longum
(Bonam) Aquam

Novice

7: Who was the mother of Helen and Polydeuces, whom Zeus seduced in the form of a
swan?
Leda
B1: Who was the mother of Perseus, whom Zeus seduced in the form of a golden rain?
Danae
B2: Who was the mother of Herakles, whom Zeus seduced in the form of her husband,
Amphitryon?
Alcmena
8: In order, give the first three kings of Rome.
Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Tullus Hostilius
B1: Give the fourth and fifth kings.
Ancus Marcius, Tarquinius Priscus
B2: Give the sixth and seventh kings.
Servius Tullius and Tarquinius Superbus
9: In what room of the Roman house did Roman patrons greet their clients?
B1: In what room of the Roman house did patrons do their bookeeping?
B2: In what room of the Roman house did patrons sleep?
10: What is the use of the ablative in this sentence?
Romani bellum cum Germanis gesserunt.
B1: What is the use of the ablative in this sentence?
Puellae a pueris territae sunt.
B2: What is the use of the ablative in this sentence?
Milites magna celeritate iter fecerunt.

Accompaniment

11: What is the fourth principal part of the Latin verb meaning ‘to be?
B1: What is the fourth principal part of the Latin verb meaning ‘to go’?
B2: What is the fourth principal part of the Latin verb meaning ‘to find’?
12: Quot Musae sunt?
B1: Quot Atrides sunt?
B2: Quot Pleiades sunt?

Atrium
Tablinum
Cubiculum

Agent
Manner
Futurus
Iturus/Itus
Inventus

Novem (Tres, according to Pausanius)
Duo
Septem

13: Translate the following sentence into English.
Cornelia non fugit sed ad canes manum extendit.
Cornelia does not flee but extends her hand to the dogs.
B1: Translate the following sentence into English.
Brevi tempore servi lectum in cubiculum portaverunt.
In a short time slaves carried a bed/couch into the bedroom
B2: Translate the following sentence into English.
Media nocte, miles Aulo et Septimo fabulam narravit.
In the middle of the night the soldier told the story to Aulus and Septimus

14: Who was the mother of Oedipus?
Jocasta
B1: Who was the father of Oedipus?
Laius
B2: Name 2 of the 4 children of Oedipus and Jocasta?
Eteocles, Polyneices, Antigone, Ismene
15: Define the Latin verb: porta
B1: Define the Latin noun: porta
B2: Define the Latin noun: portus

(you) Carry! (must be imperative)
Gate
Port/harbor

16: What was the power of a father over his children called?
B1: What was the power of the husband over his wife called?
B2: What was the power of the master over his property called?

Patria Potestas
Manus
Dominica Potestas

17: What is the meaning of the Latin expression, ‘quid pro quo’?
Something for something
B1: What is the meaning of the Latin expression, ‘ex tempore’?
Spur of the moment
B2: What is the meaning of the Latin expression, ‘sine qua non’?
A necessity
18: For which king was the Labyrinth built?
B1: Who built the Labyrinth?
B2: Who was the mother of the Minotaur?
19: What modern day country did the Romans call Helvetia?
B1: What modern day country did the Romans call Lusitania?
B2: What modern day country did the Romans call Ibernia?

Minos
Daedalus
Pasiphae
Switzerland
Portugal
Ireland

20: What state derives its name from the Latin word for ‘flower’?
Florida
B1: What state derives its name from the Latin word for ‘woods’?
Pennsylvania
B2: What state derives its name from the Latin word for ‘mountain’? Montana/Vermont

2009 IJCL

Round 2

Novice

1: Differentiate between pater and patria.
B1: Differentiate between sol and solus.
B2: Differentiate between deus and dies.

Pater-father, patria-country
Sol-sun, solus-alone
Deus-god, dies-day

2: To which deity was the peacock sacred?
B1: To which deity was the dove sacred?
B2: To which deity was the crow sacred?

Juno/Hera
Venus/Aphrodite
Apollo

3: Give the third person plural, perfect active indicative of the verb mitto, mittere.
Miserunt
B1: Make that singular and pluperfect.
Miserat
B2: Now make that first person singular and future perfect.
Misero
4: Which of the Five Good Emperors could be described as a soldier, an intellectual, an
artist, an architect, and a poet?
Hadrian
B1: Hadrian’s foreign policy was one of defensive imperialism. Along the borders of
which two countries did Hadrian build massive frontier fortifications?
Britain & Germany
B2: The only serious war fought by Hadrian was the suppression of a rebellion where?
Palestine
5: Mihi monstra oculum
B1: Nunc, omnes mihi monstrate aures
B2: Nunc, omnes tangite ambo genua

Student points to eye
All members of team point to ears
All members touch both knees

6: Which of the following was an official office in the cursus honorum?
censor tribune aedile quaestor
B1: What was the highest office in the cursus honorum?
Consul
B2: What office stood between the quaestor and consul in the cursus honorum?
Praetor
7: Who betrayed her father and aided Jason in obtaining the Golden Fleece for him?
Medea
B1: Who was her brother, whom she chopped to pieces and threw into the sea, to slow
down her pursuers?
Absyrtus
B2: Whom did she marry later in Athens?
Aegeus

8: Listen carefully to the following passage, which I will read twice, then answer the
questions about it in English.
Olim filius regis Troiani per Graeciam iter faciebat. Ibi reginam pulchram Graecorum
vidit et statim amavit. Postea eam trans mare ad urbem Troiam duxit.
Who in this passage is the reginam pulchram?
Helen
B1: Who is the filius regis?
Paris
B2: Who is the regis?
Priam
9: Give the Latin and English for the following abbreviation: N.B.
Nota bene- note well
B1: Give the Latin and English for the following abbreviation: ibid.
Ibidem- in the same place
B2: Give the Latin and English for the following abbreviation: op. cit.
Opere citato- in the work cited
10: What daughter of Coeus and Phoebe bore twin gods to Zeus?
Leto
B1: What Theban queen insulted Leto, by claiming to be a better mother than she? Niobe
B2: What happened as a result?
Apollo and Artemis killed her children
11: What Latin noun and meaning is at the root of the English word ‘monocle’?
Oculus- eye
B1: What English derivative of oculus means ‘to inject serum containing a small amount
of germs in order to make the recipient’s body immune to those germs’?
Inoculate
B2: What card game is derived from a hodgepodge of French, Swiss-French, and SwissGerman words meaning ‘eyeglasses’?
Pinochle
12: What was the cognomen of the famous Roman poet, Publius Vergilius Maro?
B1: What part of of his name was the nomen?
B2: What is the praenomen of the orator we know as Cicero?

Maro
Vergilius
Marcus

13: Translate the following sentence into Latin. Mark is a friend, but Luke is an enemy.
Marcus amicus est sed Lucius inimicus est
B1: Translate the following sentence into Latin. The good farmer works in the large field.
Bonus agricola in magno agro laborat
B2: Translate the following sentence into Latin. I will read the book with eagerness.
Librum cum studio legam

14: Which Olympian was the son of Zeus and Maia?
B1: On which mountain was he said to have been born?
B2: What is the name of the staff which Hermes carries?

Hermes
Mt. Cyllene
Caduceus

15: What is the use of the dative in this sentence? Mater mihi togam dedit.
Indirect Object
B1: What is the use of the dative in this sentence? Mihi nomen est Marcus.
Dat of possession
B2: What is the use of the dative in this sentence? Estne inimicus mihi?
Dat with special adjectives
16: What derivative of the Latin verb for “walk” is an English verb meaning “to walk
slowly”?
Amble
B1: What derivative of the Latin verb for “walk” is an English adjective meaning
“capable of walking”?
Ambulatory
B2: What is a ‘funambulist’?
Rope walker
17: Which king extended Roman influence in Latium and concluded a treaty with the
Gabii? His development of public buildings in Rome included the temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus and the Cloaca Maxima.
Tarquinius Superbus
B1: Tarquinius Superbus is said to have murdered the previous king, Servius Tullius, at
whose instigation?
Tullia
B2: Who was the son of Tarquinius Superbus, whose rape of Lucretia, ultimately led to
the demise of the Roman monarchy?
Sextus
18: Give an antonym for: dies.
B1: Give an antonym for: invenio.
B2: Give an anonym for: longus.

Nox
Amitto
Brevis

19: Which labor of Herakles involved using a bronze castanets to startle his prey?
Stymphalian Birds
B1: Which labor was accomplished by diverting the Alpheus and Peneus rivers?
Cleaning the Augean Stables
B2: Which of the labors involved sailing in a golden cup given to Herakles by Helios?
Cattle of Geryon
20: Who were ‘Cornelia’s jewels’?
Tiberius & Gaius Gracchus(prompt on her sons)
B1: Tiberius was the first Roman soldier to enter which city?
Carthage
B2: What did Gaius call his colony which he wanted to build at Carthage?
Junonia

2009 IJCL

Round 3

Novice

1: Whose army beseiged Saguntum in 219 BC, thus provoking the Second Punic War?
Hannibal
B1: In what modern country would Saguntum be located?
Spain
B2: What three islands had Carthage lost in the First Punic War which necessitated the
development of Punic interests in Spain?
Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily
2: What animal in Latin is called lupus?
B1: What animal in Latin is called vulpes?
B2: What animal in Latin is called ursus?

Wolf
Fox
Bear

3: He was the sibling of Orthus, Cerberus, and the Hydra; who was this fire-breathing
monster that was part lion, goat, and serpent?
Chimera
B1: Who was their mother of these four monsters?
Echidna
B2: Who was their father?
Typhon
4: Give the dative singular form of ratio, rationis.
B1: Give the dative singular form of manus, manus.
B2: Give the dative singular form of spes, spei.

Rationi
Manui
Spei

5: Listen carefully to the following passage which I will read twice, then answer in Latin
the questions that follow.
Graeci cum Troianis bellum gerunt. Magnum equum ligneum sub portis urbis Troiae
nocte relinquunt. Troiani equum ibi inveniunt et dicunt, “Graeci equum Minervae
dedicant.”
Question
Quibuscum Graeci bellum gerunt?
B1: Quando Graeci equum relinquunt?
B2: Cui Graeci equum dedicant?

(Cum) Troianis
Nocte
Minervae

6: The Latin word tesserae had a variety of meanings. What was the meaning of tesserae
when used in reference to the playing of games?
Dice
B1: What were tesserae used in a form of art?
Mosaic pieces
B2: What was the tessera used in an army camp?
Password/watchword

7: Who was the daughter of Priam and Hecuba, who was the first wife of Aeneas and
mother of Ascanius?
Creusa
B1: Who was the queen of Carthage, with whom Aeneas had an affair?
Dido
B2: Who was the daughter of King Latinus, whom Aeneas married in Italy?
Lavinia
8: Which couple was turned to trees for showing hospitality to the gods when they visited
their humble abode?
Baucis & Philemon
B1: What kind of trees were they turned to?
Oak & Linden(Lime)
B2: Which two Olympians did they welcome into their home?
Zeus & Hermes (Jupiter & Mercury)
9: What derivative of the Latin noun for ‘moon’ is an English noun meanning ‘one who
comes out during a full moon’?
Lunatic
B1: What derivative of the Latin pronoun for ‘who’ is an English noun meaning ‘the
number of members of a group required to be present in order to transact business’?
Quorum
B2: What derivative of the Latin adjective for “equal’ is an English noun meaning
“difference, inequality, of inconsistency”?
Disparity
10: What is the case of puellae in the following sentence? Parate aquam, puellae!
Vocative
B1: What is the case of magnae in the following sentence? Erat vir magnae virtutis.
Genitive
B2: What is the case of Romae in the following sentence? Caesar Romae mansit.
Locative
11:In what Roman province were the cities of Utica, Thapsus, Hippo Regius, and Zama?
Africa
B1: In what Roman province were the cities of Lugdunum, Bibracte, Avaricum, and
Lutetia?
Gallia
B2: In what country were the cities of Tarraco, Saguntum, Cathago Nova, and Numantia?
Hispania
12: Who of the following was not on the expedition of the Argo?
Jason
Orpheus
Idmon
Polydueces
B1: Who did not fight at Troy?
Patroclus
Sarpedon
Phoenix
Philoctetes
B2: Who did not take part in the Calydonian boar hunt?
Meleager
Atalanta
Theseus
Eurytion

Diomedes
Paris
Peleus

13: Translate the following sentence into Latin. Neptunus deus maris equorumque est.
Neptune is the god of the sea and horses.
B1: Translate the following sentence into Latin. Avis Iovis aquila est.
Jupiter’s bird is the eagle
B2: Translate the following sentence into Latin. Currus Plutonis a quattuor atris equis
trahebatur.
Pluto’s chariot is pulled by four black horses
14: The following line is from a Homeric Hymn to which Greek Olympian?
She ranges over shady hills and windy heights, rejoicing in the chase as she draws her
bow, made all of silver, and shoots her shafts of woe.
Artemis
B1: The following line is from a Homeric Hymn to which Greek Olympian?
I shall sing of Cyprus-born Cytherea, who gives mortals sweet gifts; on her lovely face,
smiles are always suffused with the bloom of love.
Aphrodite
B2: The following line is from a Homeric Hymn to which Greek Olympian?
She quickly sprang forth from the immortal head in front of aegis-bearing Zeus,
brandishing her sharp spear.
Athena
15: Give the meaning of the Latin idiom: vitam agere
B1: What is the Latin idiom for ‘at dawn’?
B2: What is the Latin idiom for to ‘pitch camp’?

To live life
Prima luce
Castra ponere

16: Dic mihi nomen tui magistri linguae Latinae.
Student says name of Latin teacher
B1: Surge et ambula circum mensam.
Student stands and walks around table
B2: Numerate Anglice usque ab uno ad quinque.
More than 1 student counts from 1 to 5
17: The Romans honored this young girl by setting up a statue of a girl seated on a horse.
Who was this girl and what had she done to earn such an honor?
Cloelia, led a group of hostages to swim across the Tiber
B1: Which early Roman hero is quoted as having said the following? “Father Tiber,
receive these weapons and this soldier in your kind waters.”
Horatius
B2: Which early Roman hero is quoted as having said the following? “Watch this, so that
you may know how cheap the body is to men who have their eye on great glory.”
Mucius Scaevola

18: What is the English translation for the motto of South Carolina, dum spiro spero?
While I breathe I hope
B1: What is the English translation for the motto of Arizona, ditat Deus?
God Enriches
B2: What is the English translation for the motto of Wyoming, cedant arma togae?
Let arms yield to peace (the toga)
19: When a Roman boy reached the age of 14 or 16, he dedicated to the household gods
the lucky charm he had worn since he was a baby. What was this charm called?
Bulla
B1: What two other things did dedicate?
Toga Praetexta & the hair from his first shave
B2: What toga did he then assume?
Toga Virilis (Pura)
20: Which of the following words is not derived from the same Latin root?
magnitude magnificent majestic magnet magnate magnanimous
B1: Which of the following words is not derived from the same Latin root?
uniform transform format formidable informant nonconformist
B2: Which of the following words is not derived from the same Latin root?
annual annul annals annuity anniversary millennium

2009 IJCL

Round Final ®

Novice

1: After accidentally killing his brother, this hero went to Tiryns to be purified. While in
Tiryns, king Proteus’ wife, Steneboea, accused him of trying to seduce her. Proteus had
scruples against killing a guest so he sent this hero with a letter to Iobates, stating that he
should kill the bearer of the letter. Iobates also did not want to kill a guest, so instead he
sent him on a task that was meant to be his demise. Who was this hero who was sent to
kill the Chimera?
Bellerophon
B1: Who gave Bellerophon the golden bridle with which to harness Pegasus?
Athena
B2: How did Bellerophon finally meet his demise?
Fell off Pegasus while trying to fly to Olympus
2: Which of the following words is not derived from the same Latin root?
doubt duet arduous duplex dubloon
B1: Which of the following words is not derived from the same Latin root?
resent present absent essential representative
B2: Which of the following words is not derived from the same Latin root?
amateur paramour amorphous enamore amorous
3: Listen carefully to the following passage which I will read twice, then answer in Latin
the questions that follow.
Interim Roma Capitoliumque in magno periculo erant. Galli collem ascendere nocte
temptabant, nam Capitolium in loco altissimo erat. Romani magnopere permovebantur.
Omnia in silentio erant. In Capitolio Marcus Manlius, qui antea consul fuerat, praeerat.
Question
Qui Capitolium ascendere temptabant?
B1: In Roma, ubi Capitolium est?
B2: Quid Manlius antea fuerat?
4: In Rome, what was a tonsor?
B1: In Rome, what was a sartor?
B2: In Rome, what was a sutor?

Galli
In loco altissimo
Consul
Barber
Tailor
Shoemaker

5: Which of the Flavian emperors was an eques of Sabine origin who had become a
successful general in the conquest of Britain and in subduing a major insurrection by the
Jews in Judea?
Vespasian
B1: Which of the Five good emperors ruled benignly and lived a simple life of Roman
modesty and left the treasury with the largest surplus it had ever seen? Antoninus Pius
B2: Which of the Julio-Claudian emperors was influenced too much by the corrupt head
of the Praetorian guard, Sejanus, who had tried to eliminate other members of the JulioClaudian family and had moved himself into position by marrying this emperor’s niece?
Tiberius
6: Translate the following sentence into English. “Pater” clamavit unus ex pueris, “Narra
fabulam.”
One of the boys shouted, “Father tell a story.”
B1: Translate the following sentence into English. Octo parvos pueros Germanos in foro
vidimus.
We saw 8 small German boys in the Forum.
B2: Translate the following sentence into English. Post mortem Romuli populus Numae
imperium dedit.
After the death of Romulus the people gave the rule to Numa.
7: Which princess did Athena arrange to do the family laundry at the shore, so that she
would find the shipwrecked Odysseus and lead him back to the palace?
Nausicaa
B1: Which king was the father of Nausicaa?
Alcinous
B2: Who was the wife of Alcinous?
Arete
8: Give the second person singular, imperfect active indicative of the verb dico, dicere.
Dicebas
B1: Make that plural and passive.
Dicebamini
B2: Give the present singular imperative of dico.
Dic
9: What do the following have in common? Arachne, Thamyris, Marsyas, and Niobe
They all challenged gods
B1: Whom did Niobe challenge?
Leto
B2: Whom did Marsyas challenge?
Apollo
10: A good journalist knows to ask the 5 W’s and the H. What are those six words in
Latin?
Quis, quid, ubi(quo,unde), quando (ubi), cur, quomodo
B1: Ubi, quo, and unde all mean ‘where’. Differeniate between all three.
Ubi-where, quo- where to, unde-where from
B2: What word asks how many?
Quot
11: Which Roman commander was defeated in Africa in 255 BC?
B1: Who had led the Carthaginian forces?
B2: Where was Xanthippus from?

Regulus
Xanthippus
Sparta

12: What is the use of the genitive in this sentence? Magnus numerus servorum est in
horto.
Partitive Genitive/Genitive of the whole
B1: What is the use of the genitive in this sentence? Area est plena servorum.
Gen with special adjectives
B2: What is the use of the genitive in this sentence? Davus ad casam servorum stat.
Possession
13: Thetis seduced Hephaestus and convinced him to make armor for which hero? Achilles
B1: Venus seduced Vulcan and convinced him to make armor for which hero?
Aeneas
B2: Eos seduced Hephaestus and convinced him to make armor for which hero? Memnon
14: Differentiate between cum, dum, and tum.
Cum-with/when, dum-while, tum-then
B1: Differentiate between manere, monere and munire.
Manere-to remain, monere-to warn, munire-to fortify/build
B2: Differentiate between mens, mensis, and mensa.
Mens-mind, mensis-month, mensa-table
15: In August of 48 BC, Caeser’s legions defeated Pompey’s army at which battle?
Pharsalus
B1: To which place did Pompey escape?
Egypt
B2: Who had Pompey beheaded and then sent the head to Caesar?
Ptolemy (XIII)
16: What Latin verb, and its meaning, is the ultimate root of the English derivative
‘surmise’?
Mittere-to send
B1: What Latin verb, and its meaning, is at the root of the English derivative ‘taciturn’?
Tacere- to be silent
B2: What Latin verb, and its meaning, is at the root of the English derivative ‘projectile’?
Iacere- to throw
17: Her nurses were the seasons, her wedding night lasted 300 years, and she frequently
bathed in the spring of Canathus, near Argos, to renew her virginity. Who was this wife
of Zeus, whom he seduced in the shape of a cuckoo?
Hera (accept Juno, before Zeus is read)
B1: Name 4 children of Hera
Ares, Hebe, Eileithyia, Hephaestus (accept Typhaon)
B2: Name someone who tried to seduce Hera, other than Zeus.
Ixion, Porphyrion, Ephialtes, Endymion

18: What is a synonym for oppidum?
B1: What is a synonym for ostendo?
B2: What is a synonym for par?

Urbs
(De)monstro
Aequus

19: If you saw wooden eggs and marble dolphins on top of the spina, where would you
be?
Circus
B1: Traditionally how many eggs or dolphins would you see?
7
B2: What were the starting gates called?
Carceres
20: Quot sunt novem plus novem?
B1: Quot sunt duodequadraginta minus novem?
B2: Quot sunt undesexaginta minus duodequinquaginta?

Duodeviginti
Undetriginti
Undecim

Novice Extra Questions
ROUND 1
Mythology: By which of Zeus' sisters did he not have a child?
B1: Name both of Zeus' sons by Hera.
B2: Name 1 of his daughters by Hera.

Hestia
Hephaestus and Ares
Hebe or Eileithyia

Language: From what Latin verb with what meaning is the English word “scripture”
derived?
Scribere- to write
1st Bonus: What derivative of “scribere” means “to write about”?
Describe
2nd Bonus: What derivative of “scribere” means “to write before”?
Prescribe
History/Life: What was the meeting of the patron with his clients called?
Salutatio
Bonus 1: What were the gifts of money and or food and clothing called?
Sportula
Bonus 2: In what room did the patron receive his clients?
Atrium (accept Tablinum)

ROUND 2
Language: Please give the adverb form of “bonus” and its meaning.
B1: Please give the adverb form of “celer” and its meaning.
B2: Please give the Latin adverb meaning “next / then.”

Bene- well
Celeriter- quickly
Deinde

Life/Hist: What would the Romans have called lunch?
B1: What would the Romans have called breakfast?
B2: What did the Romans call dinner?

Prandium
Ientaculum
Cena

Mythology: What maiden received the gift of prophecy from Apollo and was punished by
the curse of never being believed?
Cassandra
B1: Who received from Apollo the gift of prophecy and years of life as numerous as the
grains of sand? She also denied him favors and did not receive eternal youth to go along
with her long life.
(Cumaean) Sibyl
B2: Who also did not receive the gift of eternal youth to go along with his immortality
and withered away, becoming a grasshopper?
Tithonous

ROUND 3
Language: What would a Roman mean if he said, “Est dies frigidus”?
It’s a cold day
B1: How would he say, “It was a warm day”?
Erat (fuit) dies calidus.
B2: What would a Roman mean if he said, “Pluit”?
It’s raining.
History/Life. Name the imperial dynasty which built the Colosseum.
Flavian
Bonus 1: In whose reign was the Colosseum dedicated?
Titus’
Bonus 2: Which emperor had built the artifical lake, which later was filled in to provide a
site for the amphitheater?
Nero
Mythology. Name the parents of Zeus
Cronus & Rhea
B1: Give Zeus’ five siblings.
Poseidon, Hades, Demeter, Hestia, Hera
B2: Of all 6, which 2 are the oldest and youngest?
Zeus & Hestia

