IJCL Convention Certamen
February 25th 2007
First Round- Upper
1. The Carthaginians had hidden in the hills surrounding a valley enclosed with a lake on
the side. The foolish Roman commander Flamminius nonetheless entered the valley,
whereupon Hannibal sent the soldiers downhill, closed the gate of the valley and
obliterated the Roman forces. Name this 217 BC battle.
Trasimene Lake
-B1. Following Trasimene, to whom did the Romans entrust their forces, nicknamed
Cunctator?
Q. Fabius Maximus
-B2. Who led the Roman assault on Sicily in the 2nd Punic war? Marcellus
2. Translate into English: Caesar milites suos hortatur ut ferocissime pugnetur.
Caesar encourages his soliders to fight very fiercely.
-B1. What is the use of the subjunctive in the previous sentence.
Indirect Command (Jussive noun clause)
-B2. What word or words introduce a negative Indirect Command?
ne
3. Athena sent Telemachus to Nestor and Menelaus to inquire about information
regarding his father. To what cities did Telemachus travel?
Pylos and Sparta
-B1. Who was Odysseus’ faithful swineherd who recognized him and helped him regain
entry into his palace still disguised as a begger?
Eumaeus
-B2. Who was Odysseus’ old nurse who also recognized him from a scar? Euryclea
4. We should be most thankful that this man who chose to live most of life away from
Rome, for because of it we not only have the first century BC revealed in detail, but we
also have the personal views of a man who experienced it firsthand. Who was this best
friend to Cicero, and recipient of the majority of his myriad of letters?
Atticus
-B1. Of second great letter writer from Rome we have really merely disguised
philosophical treatises in letter form. Who was this scholar and stoic philosopher of the
early empire who wrote letters to a certain Lucilius?
Seneca
-B2. The third great letter writer, of course, was Pliny. To whom, besides Trajan, did
Pliny address most of his letters, including the famous ones about Vesuvius? Tacitus
5. What kind of conditional is found in the following sentence?
Si in Italia manebis, nos te conservabimus.
Future More Vivid
-B2. What kind of conditional is found in the following sentence?
Sine dubio hoc accidisset, si fuisset potestas.
Past contrary to Fact
-B1. What kind of conditional is found in the following sentence?
Si Catilina essem, has condiciones acciperem.
Present Contrary to Fact
6. Societas Annuli would be the title of what Peter Jackson film? Fellowship of the Ring

-B1. Of course that is the first installment of the Lord of the Rings trilogy. What would
the second installment be in Latin?
Duo turres OR duo arces
-B2. What then would the third installment be in Latin?
Regressus regis OR reditus
regis
7. The Romans considered it the border of the civilized world, and Augustus brags about
crossing it in his Res Gestae. Traditionally it served as the border between the Celts in
Gaul and those wild Germans. What is this river, the edge of the empire in the north,
known in Latin as Rhenus?
Rhine
-B1. What river in Spain formed the border between Carthaginian and Roman interests
before the second Punic War?
Ebro
-B2. What longest river in Italy drains Cisalpine Gaul in the valley which bears its name?
Po / Padus
8. Canis, Vulture, Senio, and Venus were all throws in this popular game, which is
similar to throwing dice.
Tali (knucklebones)
-B1. Gambling was especially popular on which festival, in which slaves and masters
traded positions?
Saturnalia
-B2. Which other festival held on February 15 featured priests whipping the shoulders of
women seeking fertility?
Lupercalia
9. Translate into Latin. We dared to tell the truth. Ausi sumus dicere veritatem
-B1. Translate into Latin. We hate our teacher.
Odimus nostrum magistrum/nostrum magistram
-B2. Translate into Latin. Follow me, slave!
Sequere me, serve
10. They include adversative, also known as concessive; circumstantial, also known as
descriptive; and causal. What are these clauses, which take their collective name from the
word they share?
Cum Clauses
-B1. Which cum clause takes an indicative verb?
Temporal
-B2. Which cum clause looks for the word tamen in the main clause?
Adversative (Concessive)
11.

Vota tamen tetigere deos tetigere parentes
Nam color in pomo est ubi permaturuit ater
Quodque rogis superest una requiescit in urna
From what story in Ovid’s Metamorphoses are these the final lines? Pyramus & Thisbe
-B1.What kind of tree is pomo?
Mulberry
-B2. At whose tomb do Pyramus and Thisbe meet?
Ninus

12. Who is the brother of Hecuba who advised the Trojans to hand Helen back over to the
Greeks to avoid the war? After the war he was spared together with his wife Theano and
allowed to sail to Italy where they founded a city.
Antenor
-B1. To what goddess was Theano a priestess?
Athena
-B2. What was the name of the city they founded?
Patavium
13. "All hands on deck," "the prows appeared in the horizon," and the exclamation "Nice
wheels!" all convey what type of metonymy in which a part represents a whole object?
Synecdoche
B1. What is the literary device in which a person or thing who is not present is
addressed?
Apostrophe
B2. What literary device is the delay of a word or phrase to the next line of poetry for
dramatic effect?
Enjambment
14. From what Latin root and meaning is ‘False’ derived?
Fallo (Fallere), to decieve
-B1. From what Latin root and meaning is ‘important’ derived? Porto (Portare), to
carry
-B2. From what Latin root and meaning is ‘obvious’ derived?
Via, way or road
15. Lucius is the main character in what work by Apuleius?
Golden Ass (Metamorphoses)
-B1. Trimalchio is a main character in what work by Petronius?
Satyricon
-B2. Who is the main character of Livius Andronicus’ Odusia?
Odysseus
16. Heracles freed me, I killed Androgeus, and Theseus finally slew me. Who am I?
Cretan Bull
-B1. According to Euripides, Heracles on his way to fetch the Mares of Diomedes
stopped in Thrace where he was entertained by King Admetus who had just lost a wife.
Who was this wife whom Heracles saved from death and returned to Admetus?
Alcestis
-B2. After Heracles captured the mares of Diomedes he entrusted them to his lover so he
could route the enemy; however, when he returned, the mares had eaten his lover. Who
was this lover whom Heracles buried and founded a city bearing his name?
Abderus
17. Give the ablative plural of dea deae f. goddess.
-B1. Give the arcahic genitive singular of familia –ae f. family.
-B2. Give the locative form of Gallia –ae f. Gaul.

Deabus
Familias
Galliae

18. Go Razorbacks! What is the motto of the state of Arkansas, which translates into
English as “Let the people rule”?
Regnat Populus
-B1. Go Tide! What is the motto of the state of Alabama, which translates into English
as “We dare to defend our rights”?
Audemus jura nostra defendere
-B2. Go Tarheels! What is the motto of North Carolina, which translates into English as
“To be rather than to be seen”?
Esse quam videri
19. He married four times, never with luck, and the last may have been the death of him,
literally. His earlier wife Messalina publicly claimed her boyfriend as the new emperor,
and had to be disposed. Who was this emperor who allegedly spoke Etruscan, annexed
Britain as a province, and married his niece Agrippina the Younger so she might have her
son Nero as next in line?
Claudius
-B1. After Burrus died and Seneca lost influence, what worthless Praetorian prefect
became the advisor to Nero?
Tigellinus
-B2. What capable general under Nero stabilized rebellion in Armenia in the late 50's
AD?
Corbulo
20. Who is the mother of Minos, Rhadamanthys, and Sarpedon, who was seduced from
her home in Tyre, from her father Agenor and brother Cadmus by Zeus in the form of a
white bull?
Europa
-B1. Who is the mother of Ampion and Zethus who was seduced by Zeus in the form of a
Satyr?
Antiope
-B2. Who is the mother of Aeacus who was seduced by Zeus in the form of a flame?
Aegina

IJCL Convention Certamen
February 25th 2007
Second Round- Upper
1. Of course some spent their time in Elysium, and some suffered in Tartarus but actually
most shades spent their time going through the motions of their former lives on this plain
found in the underworld. What is the name of this plain?
Asphodel
-B1. What is the river of wailing found in the underworld?
Cocytus
-B2. What judge of the underworld is often found in Roman comedy as the gatekeeper?
Aeacus
2. These were the large buildings which house the many tombs or urns for the dead. What
were these dovecote buildings?
Columbaria
-B1. What are the stone coffins which are literally "flesh eaters?"
Sarcophagi
-B2. What did the Romans call the spooky spirits of the dead?
Lemures
3. His work is the oldest completely surviving work in Latin dactylic hexameter. It is
essentially a scientific treatise, exposing the virtues of Epicureanism and Atom Theory.
What is this work in 6 books by T. Lucretius Carus?
De Rerum Natura
-B1. Whose works survive only in fragments although he was truly the first to fit the
Greek meter to the Latin Language in his Annales?
Q. Ennius
-B2. What author, the author of the Pharsalia, did not finish his masterpiece of dactylic
hexameter, having been caught in the Pisonian conspiracy?
Lucan
4. In Greek prose, Herodotus loves this construction above all else, but unlike Latin it
does not always use an infinitive. What is this construction, usually following a verb of
mental action that takes an accusative subject and an infinitive verb? Indirect statement
-B1. What is the requirement of verbs in indirect questions?
They are subjunctive
-B2. What is the requirement of verbs in indirect commands?
They are subjunctive
5. Complete the following analogy: Laetus is to malus as laetior is to_______.
peior
-B1. Amat is to facit as amatur is to_________.
fit
-B2. Laetus is to humilis as laetissimus is to ___________.
humillimus
6. Sulla increased their number to 20, and officially made its attainment a requirement to
enter the senate. What was this office in charge of financial affairs?
Quaestors
-B1. Which class, ineligible for the Senate, but whose sons were not, was the business
class of Rome?
Equites
-B2. Of the four assemblies in Rome, which could only be called and presided by the
Tribune?
Concilium Plebis
7. In book VIII of the Aeneid, who tells Aeneas in his sleep that his son will found the
city of Alba Longa in thirty years?
Tiber the river-god
-B1. What city does he tell Aeneas to seek help from?
Pallenteum
-B2. Who is the king of that city?
Evander

8. The following passage will be read twice. I will then read the questions in English.
You may answer in English or in Latin.
Tu ne quaesieris, scire nefas, quem mihi, quem tibi
finem di dederint, Leuconoe, nec Babylonios
temptaris numeros. ut melius, quidquid erit, pati.
seu pluris hiemes seu tribuit Iuppiter ultimam,
What is it a crime to know? What end the gods will give (quem finem di dederint)
-B1. What is it better to endure?
Whatever will be (quidquid erit)
-B2. It is wrong to know how many of what Jove will allot?
Storms (hiemes) OR by metonomy, years
9. In the sentences, “I believe you that the dog ate your homework”, “I will not spare you
the punishment”, “I trust that you will all do your homework”, and “I even envy you”,
what case would YOU be?
Dative
-B1. “I will use the textbook”, “I enjoy Latin”, “The sheep feed upon the meadow”. What
would the case of all of the previous objects?
Ablative
-B2. “Don’t forget your elders”, “Remember me”, “I am ashamed of you”. What case
would all of the previous objects be?
Genitive
10. The first line of Vergil’s Aeneid contains how many syllables? 15
-B1. The first line contains how many dactyls?
3
-B2. How many elisions does the first line contain?
0
11. Who was the first threat that Theseus disposed of after he left Troezen, who was
commonly referred to as the clubman?
Periphetes ( Corynetes)
-B1 Who was the threat Theseus disposed of, who forced travelers to stop to wash his
feet and would then kick them over a cliff to a flesh eating tortoise below?
Sciron
-B2. Who was the cruel giant whom Theseus slew who would stretch or chop the legs off
of victims depending on how tall they were?
Procrustes
12. Differentiate between lepus and lepidus.
lepus- rabbit, lepidus-charming
-B1. Differentiate between the words aes and aetas.
-B2. Give two separate translations for malum.

aes- bronze aetas-age, generation
bad and apple

13. Who am I? I cut off my father’s purple lock of hair to give to king Minos, however
Minos would not accept it and later my father and I were turned into birds which are
natural enemies.
Scylla
-B1. Who am I? I was being chased by Aesacus when I was bitten by a snake and died,
later in mourning he would throw himself from a cliff and be turned into a bird?
Hesperia
-B2.Who am I? I slept with my father Cinyras and later was turned into a tree, a tree
which gave birth to the boy Adonis.
Myrrha

14. What is the use of the dative in the following sentence?
Haec nobis agenda sunt.
Agent (agency)
-B1. What is the use of the genitive in the following sentence?
Cicero vir magnae virtutis Consul est.
Quality/Characteristic/Description
-B2. What is the use of the accusative in the following sentence?
Hic locus passus sescentos aberat.
Extent of space
15. Today is February 25, please give the date according to Roman Custom.
a.d. V Kalendas Martias
-B1. If this year was a leap year todays date would be slightly different. What would it
be?
a.d. V bis Kalendas Martias
-B2. The year of course is 2007 a.d., but what would the year be A.U.C.? 2761 A.U.C.
16. He changed the provinces to Dioceses, issued the Edict of Prices, thereby establishing
a standard price for commodities, and he persecuted the Christians. Who was this
emperor who chose Galerius, Constantius and Maximian as co-rulers in his Tetrarchy as
he split the empire in 284?
Diocletian
-B1. In the tetrarchy, what were the two designations of rulers? Augusti and Caesares
-B2. Who was co-Augustus with Diocletian in 284?
Maximian
17. Give the 2nd singular present active subjunctive of the verb malo, meaning to prefer.
Malis
-B1. Make malis plural and imperfect.
Malletis
-B2. Make malis indicative.
Mavult
18. Translate and give the author. Omnia mutantur nos et mutamur in illis.
All things change and we change with (in) them, Ovid
-B1. Translate and give the author. Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori.
It is sweet and fitting to die for the fatherland, Horace
-B2. Translate and give the author. Mens sana in corpore sana.
A sound mind in a sound body, Juvenal
19. Which of the following did not write in the same genre as the others?
Statius, Ennius, Cato, Vergil
Cato
-B1. Of course all of those other authors wrote epics and we all know Vergil’s epic is the
Aeneid, what is the name of Ennius’ epic?
Annales
-B2. What is the name of Statius’ epic?
Thebaid
20. His original name was Lucomo, from the city whence he came, but it was his wife
who seemed to wear the pants of ambition. Who was this king of Rome, the husband of
Tanaquil and the first of the Etruscan kings?
Tarquinius Priscus
-B1. Which of the kings of Rome established Ostia as the port for Rome? Ancus Martius
-B2. During whose reign did the Curatii and Horatii fight for all the marbles?
Tullus Hostilius

IJCL Convention Certamen
February 25th 2007
Third Round- Upper
1. Please translate into English: Marcus Antoninus semper nimis vini bibit.
Marcus Antoninus always drinks too much wine.
-B1. Mihi placet magis aquam vino bibere.
It pleases me to drink water rather than wine.
- B2.Vinum optimum Trimalchio convivis dedit.
Trimalchio gave the best wine to the guests.
2. He entered into a coalition with Glaucia and Saturnius in 100 to drive his agenda, but
soon he was forced to condemn them for their violence. Who was this man seeking his
6th consulship in 100, the victor over the Cimbri and Teutoni, Jugurtha, and the reformer
of the army.
C. Marius
-B1. Whose death sparked the Social wars in 91, allowing for the rise of Marius' rival
Sulla?
Livius Drusus
-B2. Why did Sulla, consul in 88 BC, decide to march upon Rome itself, setting a
disastrous precedent?
He was denied the command against Mithridates
3. Canta hunc cantum in anglice: super flumen et per silvas, domum aviae imus.
Student sings “over the river and through the woods to grandmother’s house we go”
-B1. What is the Latin word for grandfather?
Avus
-B2. What is the Latin word for uncle?
Avunculus OR patruus
4. It rarely occurred, as shown by only 22 instances over 11 centuries, but in a few more
famous instances some did suffer the inhumation. What was the penalty for a vestal
virgin who broke her vow of virginity?
Buried alive
-B1. Why this punishment? They were sacrosanct / their blood could not be spilled
-B2. What other official was sacrosanct, although it did not seem to help the Gracchi
brothers?
Tribunes
5. Who was the king of Delos who advised Aeneas and his men to seek out their ‘ancient
mother’, also his daughters had the ability to turn anything they touched into food? Anius
-B1. What land do the Trojans mistake for their ‘ancient mother’? Crete
-B2. Why would Anchises have made that assumption?
It was the home of Teucer
6.

Quare aut hendecasyllabos trecentos
Exspecta aut mihi linteum remitte
Quod me non movet aestimatione
Verum est mnemosynum mei sodalis
What demand is Catullus making in these lines?
-B1. Why is the napkin important to Catullus?
-B2. To whom is Catullus writing this poem?

Return my napkin
It is a memento from his friend
Marrucinus Asinius

7. My wife made my father young again, my uncle was warned about me by the Delphic
oracle, I participated in the Calydonian boar hunt, and I was killed ironically by my own
ship. Who am I?
Jason
-B1. After Jason divorced Medea whom did he marry?
Glauce OR Creusa
-B2. According to Ovid, to where did Medea flee after she left Jason?
Athens
8. What is the use of the subjunctive in the following sentence?
Pauci sunt qui legere non possint.
Relative clause of characteristic
-B1. What is the use of the subjunctive in the following sentence?
Cum esset senex, tamen pugnare potuit. Concessive clause (prompt on cum clause)
-B2. What is the use of the subjunctive in the following sentence?
Oderint me, dum metuant.
Clause of proviso
9. The following line from the Aeneid contains an example of what rhetorical device
Una Eurusque Notusque ruunt creberque procellis Africus. Polysyndeton
-B1. Here is another good example of what rhetorical device from Vergil
Saevae memorem Iunonis ob iram
Transferred epithet (enallage) OR Synchesis
-B2. Here’s one more from Vergil
Fluctusque ad sidera tollit
Hyperbole
10. Differentiate between a negative purpose clause and a negative result clause.
Ne (purpose) and ut non (result)
-B1. What form is lacking in the gerund?
Nominative
-B2. What form is used in place of the nominative gerund?
Present active infinitive (prompt on infinitive)
11. Terence, Epictetus, Livius Andronicus and Phaedrus all had what in common?
They came to Rome as slaves
-B1. In what region were all of the following authors born? Martial, Lucan, Seneca.
Spain/Hispania
-B2. In what region were all of the following authors born: Apuleius, Macrobius,
Terence?
Africa
12. From what Latin root and meaning does “Renaissance” derive? Nascor, to be born
-B1. From what Latin root and meaning does ‘ambition’ derive? Eo, to go
-B2. From what Latin root and meaning does ‘perjury’ derive?
Juro, to swear
13. He was seemingly happily married, but soon lusted after his sister-in-law, which led
to her mutilation. Who was this husband of Procne who cut out Philomela's tongue to
prevent her from telling on him?
Tereus
-B1. The two got revenge by feeding Tereus his own son. What other mortal fed his own
son to the gods in a banquet?
Tantalus
-B2. That son was Pelops, who was put back together by Hermes, all but one part which
was eaten by Demeter. What was that part and what replaced it? Shoulder, ivory

14. Say in Latin, “he wants to do well.”
-B1. Say in Latin, “Let him want to do better”
-B2. Say in Latin, “He wanted to do best.”

Vult bene facere (agere)
Velit melius facere (agere)
Voluit optime facere (agere)

15. Above is an open sky, and around most likely statues, trees, plants, and other
decorative items. Encircling the area is a colonnade which creates a stoa. Where am I
standing in the Roman house?
Peristylium
-B1. In this part of the Atrium I see the Imagines, the wax death masks of the ancestors.
Where am I?
Alae
-B2. I am standing at the front of the house looking out. What do I see most likely?
Shops (Tabernae)
16. For a quick ten points, make the verb fecisti passive.
-B1. Make faciebatis passive.
-B2. Make fiebatis subjunctive.

factus es
fiebatis
fieremini

17. You probably encountered the term in literature class first, as it describes a story that
literally begins "in the middle of things." What is this Latin term? in medias res
-B1. Also probably encountered in English, working on research papers, what
abbreviation means in the same place?
ibid.
-B2. What other abbreviation in research asks you to refer to something else?
cf.
18. This city was the object of a failed Athenian offensive in the Peloponnesian War, and
later under Heiro II, wavered between Roman and Carthaginian loyalty. What was this
city, home to Archimedes and the capital of Sicily?
Syracuse
-B1. What city experienced a sack by Titus which resulted in his triumphal arch?
Jerusalem
-B2. What city in southern Gaul was the preferred city of exile for many, including Milo?
It was besieged successfully by Caesarian forces at the outset of the civil war. Massilia
19. Who fell in love with Endymion, touching him every night, but fleeing whenever he
opened his eyes, eventually she concealed him in a cave to protect his beauty?
Artemis or Diana or Selene
-B1. On what mountian of Delos were Artemis and her brother born?
Mt. Cynthus
-B2. Sometimes Artemis is referred to as Locheia. To what area of her powers does that
refer?
Childbirth
20. Most unlike Pliny the Younger, this author reveled in his sycophancy for Domitian.
Who is this author whose first work was dedicated to the Spectacles of the Amphitheater
in a set of over 1500 epigrams?
Martial
-B1. To what element of society was Juvenal, contemporary of Martial, caustically brutal
in his sixth satire?
Women
-B2. Who is another contemporary of Juvenal and Martial who wrote a treatise on the
education and training of a student called Institutio Oratio?
Quintilian

IJCL Certamen
February 26th 2007
Final Round- Upper
1.

Vivamus mea Lesbia atque amemus
Rumoresque senum severiorum
Omnes unius aestimemus assis.
In what meter is this famous poem of Catullus written?
-B1. Odi et amo quare id faciam fortasse requiris
Nescio sed fieri sentio et excrucior
In what meter is this famous poem of Catullus written?
-B2. ille mi par esse deo videtur
Ille si fas est superare divos
Qui sedens adversus identidem te
Spectat et audit
In what meter is this famous poem of Catullus written?

Hendecasyllabic
Elegaic Couplet (Distich)

Sapphic Strophe

2. In 36 BC, they defeated Antony, just as they had another Roman commander 18 years
earlier. On the breastplate of Augustus Prima Porta, they are shown handing back the
standards they had taken from Crassus in that fateful Battle. Who defeated Crassus at
Charrae in 53 BC?
The Parthians
-B1. What future emperor is depicted receiving the standards from the Parthians on that
Breastplate?
Tiberius
-B2. Speaking of disasters, because of what battle was Augustus said to have wandered
the halls banging his head about the Palace screaming, Quinctilius Varus, Give me back
my eagles!?
Teutoberg Forrest
3. Cassius Dio, Fabius Pictor, Hirtius and Eutropius all wrote what genre of Latin
Literature?
History
-B1. Accius, Caecilius Statius, Naevius and Pacuvius all wrote what genre of Latin
Literature?
Drama
-B2. For what topic is Apicius well known?
Cooking
4. What is the use of the ablative in the following sentence?
Incredibili celeritate decucurrerunt.
Manner
-B1. What is the use of the ablative in the following sentence?
Res publica maximis periculis liberata est.
Separation
-B2. What is the use of the ablative in the following sentence?
Sua victoria gloriantur.
Cause
5. Translate into Latin: Don’t bite me.
Noli/Nolite mordere me
-B1. Translate into Latin using dative of possession: You have long teeth.
Longi dentes sunt tibi
-B2. Translate into Latin: The animal must drink blood. Sanguis animali bibendus est

6. Who am I? I tried to woo Marpessa but was unsuccessful when she chose Idas instead,
I fell in love with Cyrene as she wrestled a lion and whisked her away on my golden
chariot, I spat in Cassandra’s mouth, and I accidentally hit Hyacinthus with a discus and
killed him.
Apollo
-B1. Who was the lover of Apollo who cheated on him with a Thessalian? Apollo found
out after the raven told him.
Coronis
-B2. How did Apollo punish the raven for telling him?
Turned him black
7. It was the scene for more than one major event. In 63 BC, the Allobroges led the
Catilinarian conspirators across it in the midst of the night, trapping them for an arrest.
Over 300 years later it was the scene of a battle which was fought by soldiers with letters
chi and rho placed upon their shields. What was this landmark bridge that saw
Constantine emerge victorious in 303 AD?
Milvian Bridge
-B1. Which other Gallic tribe was traditionally one the strongest and the home tribe for
Vercingetorix?
Arverni
-B2. What phrase had Constantine reportedly seen / heard in his vision?
In hoc signo vinces
8. The following passage will be read twice. I will then read the questions in English.
You may answer in English or in Latin
Extemplo Libyae magnas it Fama per urbes
Fama malum qua non aliud velocius ullum
Mobilitate viget viresque adquirit eundo
Parva metu primo mox sese attollit in auras
Where does Rumor go right away? Per urbes Libyae (through the cities of Libya)
-B1. How does she gain strength?
Mobilitate (by motion) OR eundo (by going)
-B2. Why is she small at first?
Metu (due to fear)
9. The Romans had many forms of marriage, each giving rise to a slightly different
relationship. What form of marriage would you be entering if you were eating little cakes
made of spelt?
Confarreatio
-B1.After the cake was eaten, an offering to Jupiter was made, and a boy would carry the
necessary utensils for this offering in a covered basket. What was this boy called?
Camillus
-B2. To what class in Rome was confarreatio limited?
Patrician
10. Of all the deaths in mythology, his was one of the most gruesome as described by
authors such as Euripides. He denied the divinity of Dionysus and paid the ultimate price
by being torn apart by a group led by his own mother. Who was this king and son of
Agave?
Pentheus
-B1. What are these followers of Dionysus who, in a frenzied worship, tear him to
pieces?
Maenads or Bacchae (Bacchantes)
-B2. Who is the dirty old drunken sidekick satyr always hanging around with Dionysus?
Silenus

11. He is the preeminent Roman example of the historical monographer. A contemporary
of Caesar and Cicero, who is this historian of questionable morals who modeled his
works on the style of Thucydides and composed an account of the Catilinarian
Conspiracy and Jugurthine War?
Sallust
-B1. If Sallust has the forensic sensibility for history of Thucydides, what other historian
of the first century BC, can be said to have the relaxed focus of literary storytelling of
Herodotus?
Livy
-B2. What friend and contemporary of Livy whose works are lost flourished under
Augustus? It is his brother (another Asinian) who steals the napkins in the famous
Catullus poem.
Asinius Pollio
12. Differentiate between lutum and letum.
-B1. Differentiate between luctus and lectus.
-B2. Differentiate between levis and lenis.

Lutum-mud and letum-death
Luctus-grief and lectus-couch
Levis-light and lenis-gentle

13. What would the dative plural present active participle of eo, ire be? Euntibus
-B1. Make euntibus singular
Eunti
-B2. Make eunti nominative singular
Iens
14. One of the greater heroes in Greek mythology, he was the only other shade besides
Medusa not to flee when Heracles entered the underworld. Who was this son of Althea
who had received the prophecy that his life span equaled that of a partially burned log
and who organized the famed Calydonian Boar hunt?
Meleager
-B1. What maiden was the female participant in the boar hunt and justly received the
spoils for her part in killing the animal?
Atalanta
-B2. While the Calydonian boar is famous, what other boar is just as renowned for being
slain by Heracles in one of the labors?
Erymanthian Boar
15. Dicto, canto, accepto, iacto, habito. What term is used to describe the previous verbs,
in which the action is implied to be repetitive?
Frequentative or intensive
-B1. cresco, adversperasco, horresco, tremesco. What is the term used to describe these
verbs which covey the beginning of an action?
Inceptive or inchoative
-B2. What is the term used to describe how the following perfect stems are formed? Dedi,
steti, cucurri, poposci, pepuli.
Reduplication
16. Please translate into English:
Quaestiones hae nimium faciles sunt! Rogari quaestiones difficillimas volo.
These questions are too easy, I wish to be asked very difficult questions.
-B1. Translate into Latin: canis in tabernam ambulat ut cervisiam emat.
A dog walks into a bar to buy a beer.
-B2. Translate into English: Credisne amori prima facie, aut necesse est mihi ambulare
trans te iterum?
Do you believe in love at first sight or do I have to walk past you again?

17. They represent the remnants of the Greek middle voice. What are these odd verbs
which always appear passive but translate actively?
Deponents
-B1. What sense does the Greek middle usually imply?
Reflexive quality
-B2. Literally what does deponent mean?
They will put down
18. They all came from the freedman class during the empire. Who were these priests
devoted to the practice of emperor worship?
Augustales
-B1. What was the practice devoted to watching the skies for the patterns of bird flight?
Auspicies
-B2. Who interpreted the divine will of the gods from the omens or entrails?
Augurs
19. What is the alternate form, using syncopation, for timuerunt? Timuere
-B1. What is the alternate form for interficeris?
Interficere
-B2. What is the alternate form for futurum esse?
Fore
20. Who was a priestess of Ismenian Apollo whose gift of prophecy was perhaps equal to
that of her father the famous seer Teiresias?
Manto
-B1. What was the name of her son, a seer as well?
Mopsus
-B2. Who was the seer who accompanied the Argonauts but was killed by a boar on the
southern shore of the black sea?
Idmon

