2010 IJCL Certamen

ADVANCED

Round 1

1. Listen to the following sentence, which I will read twice, and answer in Latin the question
about it.
Nero, qui vetustate imperii fiebat audacior, magis magisque accensus amore Poppaeae, matrem
interficere constituit. (repeat)
The question: Quem Nero amabat?
B1: Quid Nero in animo habuit?
B2: Quando Nero audacior fiebat?

Poppaeam
Matrem interficere
Vetustate imperii

2. Who came to power after Numerianus was killed and the army claimed him Augustus, in 268
AD? He appointed Maximian to defend Gaul, and in 293 he added Galerius and Constantius as
Caesares, thus systematically dividing the Empire into smaller units for administration.
Diocletian
B1: What was this form of government of rule by four called?
Tetrachry
B2: At what Bithynian site had Diocletian established his eastern capital?
Nicomedia
3. Athena sent Telemachus to Nestor and Menelaus to inquire about information regarding his
father. Of which two cities were these men king?
Pylos and Sparta
B1: Who was Odysseus’ faithful swineherd who recognized him and helped him regain entry
into his palace still disguised as a begger?
Eumaeus
B2: Who was Odysseus’ old nurse who also recognized him from a scar?
Eurycleia
4:To whom does Catullus dedicate his poems?
B1: Whom does Lucretius invoke in his work on atomic theory?
B2: Whom does Horace address in his first Ode?

Cornelius Nepos
Venus
Maecenas

5. What is the Latin noun and meaning at the root of carnival?
Caro- meat
B1: What is the Latin adjective and meaning at the root of maraschino?
Amarus-bitter
B2: What Latin verb and meaning is at the root of repertoire?
Pario- to bear, bring forth
6: What Roman biographer, born in 70 BC, was a lawyer and secretary for the emperor, but spent
most of his time in scholarship?
Suetonius
B1: What was the Latin title of his most famous work?
De Vita Caesarum
B2: What noted figure used his influence to help Suetonius obtain privileges and positions?
Pliny the Younger

7. Who, as quaestor in 107 BC, distinguished himself in the Numidian war, in 88 BC marched on
Rome after the tribune Sulpicius Rufus removed his command against Mithridates Eupator, and
in 103-102 BC served against the Germans under Marius, later to become his chief rival?
(Lucius Cornelius) Sulla
B1: Against which Numidian king had both Marius and Sulla fought in 107 BC?
Jugurtha
B2: What rival to Sulla was elected in 87 BC as consul and thus proved to be Sulla’s second rival
in his absence?
(Lucius Cornelius) Cinna
8. Who was the immortal son of Cronus and Philyra, whose immortality was kindly taken from
him by Prometheus so that he could die after being wounded by one of Heracles’ poisoned
arrows?
Chiron
B1: On what mountain was the cave in which Chiron trained so many heros?
Pelion
B2: Which constellation did Chiron become?
Centaurus
9. What popular musical would the Romans have called: Nefanda
Wicked
B1: What other popular musical would the Romans have called: Viri pupaeque Guys and Dolls
B2: What other popular musical would the Romans have called: Merces
Rent
10. Who was the Theban seer, whom Callimachus claims received his blindness because he had
caught sight of Athena bathing, and not because Hera had blinded him after he had agreed with
Zeus in a debate?
Teiresias
B1: Which Greek prophet revealed Artemis’ anger at Aulis and informed them to sacrifice
Iphigenia?
Calchas
B2: Who was the Trojan prophet who told the Greeks secrets that only he knew involving the fall
of Troy?
Helenus
11. Which of the following rhetorical devices has nothing to do with the order of words, phrases,
or ideas?
Chiasmus Anastrophe Prolepsis Ecphrasis Synchesis
B1: What is ecphrasis?
An extended description of a work of art, building, or natural setting
B2: Differentiate chiasmus and Synchesis
Chiasmus- ABBA word order, criss-crossing word order
Synchesis- ABAB word order, interlocking word order
12. For the verb premo premere, give the 2nd person singular, pluperfect passive subjunctive pressus esses
B1: Make that active and perfect
presseris
B2: Now make that imperfect active
premereres

13. What is the case of mi in the following phrase?
Cave putas, mi amice, Gnaium esse felicem
B1: What is the case mi in the following phrase?
Ille mi par esse deo videtur
B2: What is the usage of the dative in that phrase?

Vocative
Dative
Reference

14. Later replaced by money, what gift originated as a small basket of food that was a
substitution for an invitation from a patron to clients for dinner?
Sportula
B1: What was the actual meeting in the atrium called, in which clients called upon their patron at
an early hour?
Salutatio
B2: During campaign season, what was the designated slave called who whispered the names of
greeters to the master on political campaign?
Nomenclator
15. Introduced first by Livius Andronicus and then later by Naevius, what kind of plays are
literally, plays in Greek cloaks?
Fabulae Palliatae
B1: What kind of plays are about Italian life and characters of which none still survive?
Fabulae Togatae
B2: What type of plays are dramas about a Roman historical or legendary theme called?
Fabulae Praetextae
16. On what island was Typhon buried, the site of Proserpina’s rape, and the location of
Anchises funeral games?
Sicily
B1: Which member of Odyesseus’ crew was abandoned on Sicily, only to be picked up later by
Aeneas?
Achaemenides
B2: Which Sicilian king welcomed Aeneas and his men and gave them provisions before they
crashed at Carthage?
Acestes
17. Translate the following sentence into English: Cum patronus pecuniam clienti dedit, tamen
pauper esset.
Although the patron gave money to the client, (nevertheless) he was still poor
B1: Translate into English: Semper discipuli infelices putant omnes magistros stulti esse
Unhappy students always think (that) all teachers are fools/stupid/dumb
B2: Translate into English: Magister bonus discipulis malis parendus est.
Bad students must obey the good teacher/The good teacher must be obeyed by the bad students
18. Often seen when circumstances are uncertain, what is the Latin and English for the
abbbreviation: d.v. ?
deo volente-god willing
B1: Used in a footnote to refer to another footnote, what is the Latin and English for the
abbreviation: op.cit.?
opere citato- in the work cited
B2: What is the Latin and its abbreviation, which could be seen at the top of a resume?
c.v.-curriculum vitae

19. What derivative from the Latin verb to swear means: to willfully give false or dishonest
testimony?
Perjury
B1: What derivative from the Latin verb to believe means: the act or process of being licensed or
officially recognized?
Accreditation
B2: What derivative from the Latin noun meaning garment means: a sense of shame, mockery,
perversion, or disgrace?
Travesty
20. In 276 BC, who was defeated by Curius Dentatus at the battle of Beneventum, even though
this king of Epirus had already achieved victories at Asculum and Heraclea?
Pyrrhus
Handout visual- Give students a few moments.
B1: Which letter represents a battle fought in 217 BC?
B2: Which letter represents the battle of Actium?

C
B

2010 IJCL Certamen

ADVANCED

Round 2

1. What use of the subjunctive is found in the phrase: vivamus, mea Lesbia, atque amemus?
Volitive/Horatory Subjunctive (prompt on Independent usage)
B1: What use of the subjunctive is found in the phrase: quid agam, iudices? Quo me vertam?
Delibrative Subjunctive/ Dubitative Subjunctive
B2: What use of the subjunctive is found in the phrase: utinam Clodius viveret?
Optative Subjunctive
2. What is the Latin title of Julius Caesar’s commentary on the Civil War?
B1: What is Lucan’s work on the same subject, with a similar title?
B2: What is the other name is this work known?

De Bello Civili
Bellum Civile
Pharsalia

3. What derivative from the Latin word for lay low or knock over is defined as: to arrange or
form into layers?
Stratify
B1: What derivative from the same root is an English adjective meaning: lying flat with face
downward?
Prostrate
B2: What derivative from the same root is an English noun meaning: sudden confusion or
amazement?
Consternation
4. The ornate carvings on this monument feature the following: Aeneas, the female figure Tellus
with her two children, and a number of processions including a royal procession headed by
Augustus himself, who dedicated this monument. It would become one of the most noble
monuments of Augustan art. What is the name of this altar dedicated in 9 BC, but not built until
13 AD?
Ara Pacis
B1: What is the suovetaurilia, which can be seen on the altar itself?
Sacrifice of a pig, sheep, and bull
B2: What other monument built near the Tiber river has columns on which his Res Gestae are
carved?
Mausoleum
5. This name is shared by two individuals. The first was a suitor to Andromeda who caused a riot
at the marriage of Andromeda to Perseus. The other was a Thracian king who was tormented by
the Harpies. What is the name common to both?
Phineus
B1: Which king of the Gaetulians was a suitor of Dido, before Aeneas?
Iarbas
B2: Who was the most insolent of Penelope’s suitors?
Antinous

6. Translate into Latin the prepositional phrase in this sentence:
The acropolis stands in the middle of Athens.
B1: Translate into Latin both prepositional phrases in this sentence:
From Carthage the warship sailed to Italy.
B2: Translate into Latin both prepositional phrases in this sentence:
Vergil was born in Mantua but died in Brundisium.

In Media Athenis
Carthagine, ad Italiam
Mantuae, Brundisi

7. Who am I? I was a famous Roman elegist, born of an equestrian family in central Italy, but the
army confiscated part of my family’s estate when I was young. I spent most of time writing
about my one true love, whom I called Cynthia in my verses.
Propertius
B1: Who was my patron?
Maecenas
B2: What city in central Italy was I from?
Assisi
8. Who defeated Caesar’s legions at Gergovia in 52 BC, but would later that year be defeated by
Caesar at Alesia?
Vercingetorix
B1: What Gaul led the attack and sack of Rome in 390 BC?
Brennus
B2: What Visigoth led the attack and sack of Rome in 410 AD?
Alaric
9. Who is the son of Daunus and the nymph Venilia, who is the king of the Rutulians and suitor
to Lavinia?
Turnus
B1: Who is the sister of Turnus who assists him during the war?
Juturna
B2: Which Greek does Turnus fail to enlist as an ally in his wars against Aeneas?
Diomedes
10. What Latin phrase often used by police when attempting to deduce the way in which a
criminal works, translates as a method of operating?
Modus operandi
B1: What Latin phrase translates as caught in the act?
In flagrante delicto
B2: In the modern legal system, what actually is a writ of habeas corpus?
It requires officials to bring a detained individual before a court
to determine that individual’s imprisonment
11. Which of the following is not derived from the same Latin root as the others?
Obligate Derogatory arrogant surrogate perogative
B1: What Latin verb and meaning is at the root of obligate?
Ligo ligare- to bind
B2: What Latin verb and meaning is at the root of the other words?
Rogo rogare- to ask

12. What do the following have in common? Amphiaraus, Hippolytus, Oenomaus, and Phaethon
Died while driving their chariots
B1: What do the following have in common? Pelopia, Myrrha, and Nyctimene
Slept with their fathers
B2: What do the following have in common? Idmon, Adonis, and Hyas
Killed by boars
13. What festival lasted seven days during Cicero’s time, but was reduced to three by Augustus,
during which wax candles and sigillaria were exchanged and social order was inverted?
Saturnalia
B1: During what other festival were two youths smeared on the forehead with blood then wiped
with milk-dipped wool, and others could be seen running through the streets hitting women with
goat skin thongs?
Lupercalia
th
B2: What other festival on May 9 saw people rise at midnight to cast black beans over their
shoulders to apease dead spirits?
Lemuria
14. Give a synonym for: fleo
B1: Give a synonym for: rumpo
B2: Give a synonym for: suesco
15. Which rhetorical device is the superfluous use of words?
B1: What is the superfluous use of conjunctions?
B2: What is the omission of conjunctions?

lacrimo/ploro/lamentor
frango/confringo
soleo
Pleonasm
Polysyndeton
Asyndeton

16. Which Olympian had the epithet Argeiphontes, meaning “Argus-killer”? Hermes/Mercury
B1: Which lover of Zeus was Hermes trying to retreive from Argus?
Io
B2: What was the strait of Maeotis called after Io in the form of a cow crossed it?
Bosphorus
17. Listen carefully to the following lines from Catullus which I will read twice as prose. Then
answer the question that follows in Latin.
Marrucine Asini, manu sinistra
non belle uteris, in ioco atque vino
tollis lintea neglegentiorum.
Hoc salsum esse putas? Fugit te, inepte
quamvis sordida res et invenustas est. (repeat)
The question: Qua manu Asinius non bene utitur?
B1: Quae Asinius tollit?
B2: Quid Asinius putat hoc esse?

Sinistra
Lintea
Salsum

18. This emperor reduced the kingdom of Cappadocia to a province, and early in his principate
mutinies had broken out along the Rhine and Danube river. Who was this emperor who was
conspired against by Sejanus and Agrippina?
Tiberius (Claudius Nero)
B1: Against which Julio-Claudian was the unsuccessful conspiracy of Camillus Scribonius and
Annius Vinicianus?
(Tiberius) Claudius (Drusus)
B2: Against which Julio-Claudian was the unsuccessful conspiracy of Lentulus Gaetulicus?
Gaius (Julius Caesar Germanicus)/Caligula
19. In what speech of 56 BC does Cicero defend a former protégé and destroys the thin
reputation of Clodia?
Pro Caelio
B1: In what speech of 62 BC does Cicero defend the arts and literature as he defends the
citizenship of a poet?
Pro Archia
B2: In what speech of 70 BC does Cicero levy charges of abuse against a former governor of
Sicily?
In Verrem
20. What current movie starring John Travolta would the Romans have called: Lutetiā cum
amore
From Paris with Love
B1: What current movie starring Mel Gibson would the Romans have called: Acies tenebrarum
Edge of Darkness
B2: What current movie starring Kristen Bell and Josh Duhamel would the Romans have called:
Quando Romae
When in Rome

2010 IJCL Certamen

ADVANCED

Round 3

1. What is the English translation of the motto of Wyoming: Cedant arma togae?
Let arms yield to the toga/peace
B1: What is the English translation of the motto of Massachusetts:
Ense petit placidam sub libertate quietem?
With the sword she seeks calm/serene peace/quiet under liberty/freedom
B2: What is the English translation of the mottoe of Maryland:
Scuto bonae voluntatis Tuae coronasti nos?
With the shield of thy good will/kindness Thou/you hast covered/crowned us
2. Give an antonym for: cunctus
B1: Give an antonym for: supplex
B2: Give an antonym for: apertus

Nullus
Superbus/adrogans/fastidiousus
Occultus/absconditus/clausus

3. Who earned the name Alexander for his bravery in defending the flocks he tended on Mt. Ida,
though he is often taunted by Hector as unmanly and not brave?
Paris
B1: What nymph from Mt. Ida did Paris fall in love with and marry?
Oenone
B2: Which of Paris’ brothers became furious with him after Paris had won every contest in
games after he had returned to Troy?
Deiphobos
4. What were the colors of the four original factiones?
B1: What were the Latin terms used for these four factiones?

Red, white, green, and blue
Russati, albati, prasini, and veneti
purple and gold

B2: What two colors were later added by Domitian?

5. Listen carefully to the following poem by Catullus which I will read twice as prose, then
answer the question that follows.
Odi et amo. quare id faciam, fortasse requiris.
nescio, sed fieri sentio et excrucior.
The question. What meter is this poem written in?
B1: How many elisions occur in this poem?
B2: How many syllables are in this poem?

Repeat
Elegiac Couplet
3
29

6. What is the Latin word and meaning at the root of exorbitant?
Orbis- circle
B1: What derivative of the same word means: a path of the planet around the sun?
Orbit
B2: What derivative of the same word means: a globe or sphere?
Orb
7. Which author from Sarsina, Umbria was the author of at-least 21 plays such as Bacchides,
Pseudolus and Miles Glorious?
Plautus
B1: What is Plautus’ full name?
Titus Maccius/Maccus Plautus
B2: Which two of the following plays did Plautus not write?
Mostellaria Aulularia Hecyra Cistellaria Andria Asinaria
8. It was here where Jugurtha was starved, Vercingetorix was beheaded, Sejanus was strangled
and the conspirators of Catline were put to death. What is the name of this holding cell near the
forum which functioned as the Roman prison for high profile prisoners awating death?
Tullianum/Mamertine Prison
B1: Which hill of Rome was used by the Plebians in several secessions and was where Remus
sighted his vultures?
Aventine
B2: The Circus Maximus lies between which two hills of Rome?
Aventine & Palatine
9. In what type of geographical area would you be if you encountered an Oread?
B1: What type of nymph might you encounter near a spring or lake?
B2: What is the general term for a tree nymph?

Mountains
Naiad
Dryad

10. Listen carefully to the following passage which I will read twice. Then answer the questions
that follow in English.
Cum Caesar in Gallia pugnaret, ad flumen Rhenum venit. Caesar se transiturum esse putavit sed
cum navibus transire nolebat. Caesar pontem trans Rhenum aedificandum esse constituit. Multos
menses milites strenue laborabant et tandem pons conficitur. Caesar militesque in Germaniam
iverunt, sed statim redierunt in Galliam. Casaer pontem deleri iussit. (repeat)
The question: How did Caesar not want to cross the Rhine?
With ships
B1: For how long did the soldiers work building the bridge?
Many months
B2: After Caesar had returned into Gaul after crossing the Rhine what did he order?
That the bridge be destroyed
11. By which of his sons was Odysseus killed?
Telegonus
B1: Who was Telegonus’ mother?
Circe
B2: Whom did Circe marry after Telegonus returned to Aeaea with Odysseus’ body?
Telemachus

12: Translate into English the following: Defessane es, cum totam diem per mentem meum
cucurreris?
Are you tired, because you’ve been running through my mind all day?
B1: Translate into English: Si tibi corpus pulchrum sit dicam, ad me id teneas?
If I should say your body is beautiful, would you hold it against me?
B2. Translate into English: Credisne amori prima facie, aut necesse est mihi ambulare trans te
iterum?
Do you believe in love at first sight or do I have to walk past you again?
13. Who was given the command against Mithridates in 66 BC?
B1: What law gave Pompey that command?
B2: What comander did Pompey replace?

Pompey
Lex Manilia
Lucullus

14. The Augustan age of writing ends with whose death?
Ovid
B1: Approximately how long does the Golden Age of Latin Literature last?
90-100 years
B2: Which of the following authors is not considered an author of the silver age?
Martial Quintilian Tacitus Tertullian Lucan
15. What type of subordinate clause is found in the following phrase?
Lucius metuebat ne quis suum tectum incendat.
Clause of fearing
B1: Translate the toss-up sentence into English
Lucius feared that someone would burn his house
B2: What other conjunctions, besides ne result in the ali- of an indefinite pronoun to be lost?
Si, nisi, num
16. Heracles died when his wife sent him a tunic to wear, unaware that the blood with which she
had covered it was a poison that tore his flesh when he removed the garment. Who was this
wife?
Deianeira
B1: Whose poisonous blood was on the tunic?
Nessus
B2: Why had she put the blood on the tunic?
Nessus had tricked Deianeira into thinking it was a love potion
17. Give the dative singluar for the phrase: the worthy king
B1: Give the genitive singular for the phrase: the one senate
B2: Give the ablative for the phrase: the two boars

Regi digno
Unius senatus
Duobus apris

18. Give the Latin title of Apuleius’ most famous work.
Metamorphoses
B1: Which Roman writer may have written the Greek model, called “Lucius or the Ass? Lucian
B2: Against what charge did Apulieus have to defend himself?
Use of Magic

19. In 68-69 AD, four emperors died, which two died by their own hands?
Nero & Otho
B1: Whom had Galba chosen as his heir, which had offended Otho to have Galba and his heir
both assassinated?
Piso Licinianus
B2: Who was the brother of Vespasian who almost convinced Vitellius to abdicate but failed and
died one day later, the day before Vitellius himself was assassinated?
Sabinus
20. Which of the following is not derived from the same Latin root as the others?
Surreptitious corroborate rapid ravine usurp
B1: What Latin noun and meaning is at the root of corroborate?
Robur- oak tree, strength
B2: What is the Latin verb and meaning at the root of the other words? Rapio rapere- to seize

2010 IJCL Certamen

ADVANCED

Final Round

1. What daughter of Helen and Menelaus married Neoptolemus?
B1: Whom did she marry after Neoptolemus died?
B2: Who was Orestes’ and Hermione’s son?

Hermione
Orestes
Tisamenus

2. What Thracian slave, a freedman of Augustus, wrote fables based on Aesop?
B1: On what topic did Columella write?
B2: What kind of poetry did Persius write?

Phaedrus
Agriculture
Satire

3. Which two of the following words come from a common Latin root?
Dispense penthouse appendage suspend
B1: What Latin verb and meaning is at the root of dispense and suspend?
Pendo pendere: to hang (to cause to hang)
B2: What Latin verb and meaning is at the root of penthouse and appendage?
Pendeo pendere- to hang (suspended)
4. Who, during his short three month reign, set out to confront the rehabilitation of the state
financial situtation which was in ruin; he also set out to restore discipline among the army which
had disintegrated during the reign of his predecessor Commodus?
Pertinax
B1: Who was his successor and how did he manage to take the principate?
Didius Julianus and he bought it at auction
B2: After Didius Julianus, three men were claimed as emperor until Septimius Severus defeated
them in 194 and 197. Who were the two men he defeated?
Pescennius Niger & Clodius Albinus
5.Differentiate between ara, ira, and ora
ara-altar; ira-anger; ora-shore
B1: Differentiate between partior, patior, and potior
Partior-give birth; patior-endure/allow; potior-get/gain possession/obtain
B2: Differentiate between tum, dum, cum, num, and sum
Tum-then; dum-while; cum-with/when/because/since;
num-whether/introduces a question with a negative answer ;sum-I am

6. What is the 2nd person singular, future active, imperative of the verb iudico?
B1: Make iudicato plural.
B2: Make iudicatote third person.

Iudicato
Iudicatote
Iudicanto

7. Tacitus’ first work, a biography of Gnaeus Julius Agricola, is not only a panegyric to his
father-in-law, but also a fierce invective against what emperor?
Domitian
B1: Which of Tacitus’ works covers the time from Nero’s death to the death of Domitian?
Histories/Historiae
B2: Which of his works cover the time from Augustus’ death to the death of Nero?
Annals/Annales
8. They were originally personified curses who were seldom depicted in art. Whom did
Aeschylus euphemistically call the Semnai Theai, meaning the venerable goddesses?
Furies/Eumenides/Erinyes
B1: Whom did Althaea call upon the Furies to punish?
Meleager
B2: Alcmeon was also famously hounded by the Furies for killing his mother, the wife of the
seer Amphiaraus. What was Alcmeon’s mother’s name?
Eriphyle
9. With niches called loculi and pots called ollae, what were these buildings that functioned as
huge tombs, named for their dovecote appearance?
Columbaria
B1: What was a cenotaphium?
Empty tomb for honoring the dead
B2: What was name for the Roman crematorium?
Ustrinum
10. What type of conditional is found in the following sentence?
Nisi Aeneae attigissent Latium rates, numquam exstitisset Roma.
Past Contrary to Fact (prompt on contrary to fact)
B1: Translate the sentence from the toss-up.
If Aeneas’ ships had not reached Latium, Rome would never have existed
B2: In Latin, alter the toss-up sentence to a present contrary to fact conditional
Nisi Aeneae attingerent Latium rates, numquam exsisteret/existaret Roma

11. Listen carefully to the following passage from which I will read twice as prose. Then answer
the question that follows in Latin.
….Sed regna Tyri germanus habebat
Pygmalion, scelere ante alios immanior omnes.
Quos inter medius furor. Ille Sychaeum
Impius ante aras, atque auri caecus amore,
Clam ferro incautum superat, securus amorum
germanae; factumque diu celavit, et aegram,
multa malus simulans, vana spe lusit amantem.
The question: Quo Pygmalion Sychaeum superat?
B1: Quo Pygmalion caecus erat?
B2: Quomodo Pygmalion sororem lusit?

(repeat)
Ferro
Amore auri
Vana spe

12. What entity, begun by its members at Bononia, was legalized by the Lex Titia in 43 BC?
2nd Triumvirate
B1: What son of a triumvir wrought havoc upon Italy in 36 BC by blockading Italy from Sicily
using ships essentially as a pirate?
Sextus Pompey
B2: Who built a fleet to deal with Sextus Pompey and defeated him that same year?
Agrippa

13. Whose exploits included defeating the Solymi, an ambush by the best Lycian soldiers, a
campaign against the Amazons, and of course the task of defeating the Chimaera?
Bellerophon
B1: Who was the King of the Lycians who gave these tasks to Bellerophon?
Iobates
B2: Who was the wife of Proteus, who accused Bellerophon of trying to seduce her, for which
Proteus sent Bellerophon to Iobates with a letter telling him to kill the bearer?
Stheneboea/Anteia
14. Quis habebatur esse pater saturae Latinae
B1: Quis primus scriptor historiae Latinae erat?
B2: Quis primus scriptor scaenae Latinae erat?

Lucilius
Cato
Livius Andronicus

15. Which of the following words does not belong because of its meaning?
Salix ornus ilex nubes ulmus acer
B1: What are all the other words words?
Trees/arbores
B2: Give the meaning of any 3 of the trees.
Salix-willow; ornus-ash; acer-maple; ilex-(holm)oak; ulmus-elm

16. Translate the following sentence into Latin: Cornelius the shepherd thought that her flock
was the whitest.
Cornelius, pastor, putavit gregem eius albissimam esse
B1: Translate the following sentence into Latin: The baker did not doubt that his bread was the
best.
Pistor non dubitavit quin (suus) panis optimus esset
B2: Translate the following sentence into Latin: The barber will work the whole day provided
that he does not become tired.
Tonsor totum diem laborabit [dum ne] defessus fiat
[dum ne/dummodo ne/tantum ne/ modo ne]
17. In 60 AD, what widow of an East Anglian king, led the Britons to burn down the Roman
garrisons at Camulodunum, Londinium, and Verulamium before she was defeated?
Boudicca
B1: By whom was she defeated?
Suetonius (Paulinus)
B2: What other woman warrior led forces against Rome in AD 272, after taking over Egypt and
Asia Minor, but was captured at Palmyra?
Zenobia
18. What Latin noun and meaning is at the root of ferret?
Fur- thief
B1: What Latin noun and meaning is at the root of catepillar?
Pilus- hair
B2: What two Latin nouns and their meanings are at the root of porcupine?
Porcus-pig; spina-thorn/spica-spike
19. What rhetorical device is illustrated in the following line from Juvenal? Nobilitas sola est
atque unica virtus
Chiasmus
B1: What rhetorical device (other than alliteration) is illustrated in the following line from
Vergil? Natat uncta carina/ frondentesque ferunt remos et robora silvis Metonymy/Hendiadys
B2: What rhetorical device is illustrated in the following line from Catullus? Tam te basia multa
basiare
Polyptoton (NOT anaphora)
20. Who killed Autonous and Protesilaus?
B1: Who killed Dolon and Rhesus?
B2: Who killed Iphidamas and Hippolochus?

Hector
Diomedes
Agamemnon

2010 Advanced
EXTRA QUESTIONS
Round 1
Language
Using fluctus, give the Latin adjective that means prone to waves or full of waves.
Fluctuosus
B1: Using cornu, give the Latin adjective that means provided with horns:
Cornutus
B2: Using pugnare, give the Latin adjective that means a quality or tendency to fight
Pugnax

Literature
Give the full name of the author of the Heroides and the Metamorphoses. Publius Ovidius Naso
B1: In what meter was the Metamorphoses?
Dactylic Hexameter
B2: What two types of poetic feet are used in dactylic hexameter?
Dactyls and spondees

Mythology
In mythology, what son of Zeus and Electra was the founder of the Trojan race?
B1: To what mythological group of seven did Electra belong?
B2: Whose mother was Electra’s sister Maia?

Dardanus
Pleiades
Mercury

History
To what country do the names “Oenotria,” Hesperia” and “Ausonia” all refer?
B1: What does Hesperia mean?
B2: What is the meaning of Oenotria?

Italy
Western Land
Land of vines

Round 2
Language
Using a gerundive, translate into Latin the purpose clause in the following sentence.
We went to the ampitheater to see the gladiators.
Ad gladiatores videndos
OR videndorum gladiatorum causa/gratia (causa or gratia must follow the phrase)
B1: Now translate the purpose clause using a subjunctive
Ut gladiatores videremus
B2: Now translate the purpose clause using a supine
Gladiatores visum
Literature
For what type of literature are both Tacitus and Livy known?
History
B1: What Roman writer, besides Cicero, wrote an account of the Catilinarian conspiracy?
Sallust
B2: What is the topic of Sallust’s other well-known work?
Jugurthan War

Mythology
Identify the following: Simois, Scamander, and Xanthus
B1: What is the name of the most important gate in Troy?
B2: What was the citadel of Troy called?

Rivers of Troy
Scaean Gate
Pergamum

History
Marius was allied with which patrician family by marriage?
B1: Who was the first Roman to negotiate with the Parthians?
B2: Which commander did Marius replace in Africa?

Julii
Sulla
Caecilius Metellus

Round 3

Language
Distinguish in meaning between credere and crescere
Credere-to believe/trust; crescere- to grow/increase
B1: Distinguish in meaning between orbis and morbus
Orbis-circle/globe; morbus-death/disease
B2: Distinguish in meaning between flumen and fulmen
Flumen-river/stream; fulmen-lightning/thunderbolt

Literature
Give the full name of the author of the following: Culex, Ciris, Dirae, Moretum, Aeneid
Publius Vergilius Maro
B1: Name the work of Vergil which is four books describing life on the farm
Georgics
B2: Name the Greek author after whose, Works and Days, Vergil modeled the Georgics.
Hesiod

Mythology
Name the mythological sinner who suffers extremely severe punishment in Hades because he
planned to seduce Hera.
Ixion
B1: Who was punished in Hades for attempting to abduct Aegina?
Sisyphus
B2: Who is punished for serving his son to the gods?
Tantalus
History
With what aspect of Roman life to you associate the following?
Camillus, flammeum, tunica recta, pronuba
B1: What was the flammeum?
B2: Who was the pronuba?

Wedding
Bride’s veil
Matron of honor

