Harvard Certamen 2010
Advanced Round 1
1. TOSSUP) What Roman emperor is said to have had an affair with the Jewish
princess Berenice?
ANS: Titus
B1) Titus celebrated a triumph for the conquest of Jerusalem after a Roman
general captured the last Jewish stronghold in 73 AD. What was the name of this
stronghold?
ANS: Masada
B2) What Roman general conquered this stronghold?
ANS: Flavius Silva
2. TOSSUP) Quid Anglice significat “vinculum”?
ANS: chain, shackle
B1) Quid Anglice significat “venia”?
ANS: favor, pardon, permission
B2) Quid Anglice significant “vestigium”?
ANS: step, track, trace, footstep
3. TOSSUP) What son of King Lycurgus and Queen Eurydice died after he was
bitten on the foot by a snake?
ANS: Opheltes
B1) What former queen had left Opheltes in a bed of parsley?
ANS: Hypsipyle
B2) Who gave Opheltes the name “Archemorus,” meaning “beginner of doom”?
ANS: Amphiaraus
4. TOSSUP) ēs b
s
o e ēs d
se e
d e
a
e d a a
o asse e
s es
sed e se
e e
o
s od es a a
ANS: s b
B1) ēs b
s
o e ēs d
se e
d e a
e d a a
o asse e
s es
sed e se
e e
o
ae
a s
s es o asse
ANS: adverbium
B2) ēs b
s
o e ēs d
se e
d e a
e d a a
o asse e
s es
sed e se
e e
o
e so es
e
s
ANS: se
d
5. TOSSUP) As with any good study of Latin Literature, any good series of Latin
literature questions in Certamen begins with Catullus. What name, often used by
the poet himself, refers to the first sixty poems of Catullus’ Carmina, reflecting
the relatively light and trifling subject matter they encompass?

ANS: nugae
B1) Poems 61-68 of the Carmina are often referred to as the “carmina docta.”
Which of these poems, written in 406 hexameters, employs an excellent example
of ekphrasis by embedding the story of Ariadne’s abandonment on the island of
Naxos within the story of the marriage of Peleus and Thetis?
ANS: Poem 64
B2) Catullus often refers, directly or indirectly, to a woman poetically named
Lesbia. What, according to our sources, was this woman’s true name?
ANS: Clodia (Metell )
6. TOSSUP) Give the ultimate Latin verb root and its English meaning from which
we derive “sluice” and “clause.”
ANS: a d = close
B1) Give the ultimate Latin verb root and its English meaning from which we
derive “accrue,” “crew,” and “concrete.”
ANS: es =grow/increase
B2) Which of the following English words, if any, is not derived from the same
Latin root as the others: percolate, accolade, colander, and portcullis.
ANS: accolade
7. TOSSUP) What Latin poet, born at Corduba in Spain, wrote numerous lost works,
including a Saturnalia and several Laudes Neronis, but is most famous for his
ten-book epic poem on the civil war between Pompey and Caesar, called the
Bellum Civile?
ANS: (Marcus Annaeus) Lucanus/Lucan
B1) What is the other, technically erroneous, name for the Bellum Civile?
ANS: Pharsalia
B2) Despite Lucan’s flourishing literary career, he was forced to commit suicide
by the emperor Nero in 65 A.D. upon the discovery of his involvement in whose
conspiracy?
ANS: (Gaius Calpurnius) Piso’s
8. TOSSUP) What corrupt charioteer sabotaged King Oenomaus’s chariot after
Pelops bribed him to do so?
ANS: Myrtilus
B1) For whose hand in marriage was Pelops competing?
ANS: Hippodamia’s
B2) What price had Myrtilus demanded of Pelops?
ANS: One night with Hippodamia
9. TOSSUP) What early Latin author, regarded by Cicero as antiquated and of little
interest, was brought from Tarentum to Rome in 284 B.C., where he became tutor
to the sons of Livius Salinator and produced a crude translation of Homer’s
Odyssey?
ANS: (Lucius Livius) Andronicus
B1) What was the Latin title of this epic?

ANS: The Odusia
B2) As far as we know, Livius Andronicus also produced the first Latin comedy
and tragedy. At what games in 240 B.C. were these plays presented?
ANS: The Ludi Romani
10. TOSSUP) At what battle in 43 BC were the legions of the Roman state victorious
despite losing their consuls, Gaius Vibius Pansa and Aulus Hirtius?
ANS: Mutina
B1) What leader were the legions fighting against?
ANS: Marc Antony (Marcus Antonius)
B2) What governor of Cisalpine Gaul had Mark Antony been trying to besiege at
Mutina before he himself was attacked?
ANS: (Decimus) Iunius Brutus (Albinus)
11. TOSSUP) Give a Latin synonym for the noun “stella”.
ANS: aster, sidus (star)
B1) Give a Latin synonym for the noun “terra”.
ANS: humus, solum, tellus (ground/earth)
B2) Give a Latin synonym for the noun litus.
ANS: ora (shore)
12. TOSSUP) In a Roman House, what rooms just off the atrium would hold the
family’s imagines?
ANS: alae (prompt on “the wings”)
B1) What were imagines?
ANS: busts of one’s ancestors
B2) Of what were imagines usually made?
ANS: wax
13. TOSSUP) What Latin author of the late Republic found the time, outside his busy
and successful military schedule, to write seven books of commentary on his
campaigns throughout the region of Gaul?
ANS: C. Julius Caesar
B1) What legate of Caesar is said to have written the eighth and final book of the
Commentariī de Bellō Gallicō?
ANS: (Aulus) Hirtius
B2) Give the Latin title of Caesar’s other set of Commentariī, which focuses on
his conflict with his rival Pompey?
ANS: (Commentariī) De Bellō Civilī
14. TOSSUP) In order to win his brother the hand of King Neleus’ daughter, what
seer attempted to steal the cattle of Phylacus?
ANS: Melampus
B1) What was the name of Melampus’ brother?
ANS: Bias
B2) What special ability did Melampus possess?

ANS: Understood animal speech
15. TOSSUP) Listen carefully to the following passage, which I will read twice, and
answer IN LATIN the question that follows:
oes s ē
d ae
s o
s be s e
a
a
e a a
o e d
se o e a
o a
a e
ad e
e o
b s
a b s ae ae ē ē
e a os o o o
ē ē s
sapientissimus.
Question:
de
o
ad oes
e s
ANS: ex omnibus partibus Graeciae
B1)
od
o
oes s e
s
ANS: be
B2) Quibus auxiliis Croesus maximam famam obtinuit?
ANS: d
se o e
16. TOSSUP) What do the following nouns have in common grammatically?:
e ēs, a s, valvae, s ae?
ANS: They are commonly or exclusively found in the plural
B1) What do the following nouns have in common grammatically?: a b s s,
dē
, ē
,
s?
ANS: They are heterogeneous / they vary in gender
B2) What do the following nouns have in common grammatically?: s a , opus,
secus, nihil?
ANS: They are indeclinable nouns
17. TOSSUP) Which famous Roman was deified as the war god Quirinus after his
death in 717 BC?
ANS: Romulus
B1) After Romulus’ death, there was a one-year period during which no king
ruled. What was the Latin term for this period?
ANS: Interregnum
B2) After the interregnum, Numa Pompilius was chosen to be Rome’s second
king. For what god of gates, doors, beginnings and endings did Numa build a
temple during his reign?
ANS: Janus
18. TOSSUP) Which of the following Latin nouns cannot mean “ocean” or “sea”:
mare, plaga, pontus, aequor, pelages?
ANS: plaga
B1) Which of the following Latin nouns cannot mean “field” or “plain”: ager,
campus, arvum, seges, planities, planitas?
ANS: planitas
B2) Give a Latin synonym for the noun amnis.
ANS: flumen, rivus (river)
19. TOSSUP) What Greek goddess visited the home of Celeus and Metaneira?

ANS: Demeter
B1) What was the name of this royal couple’s son to whom Demeter wished to
grant immortality?
ANS: Demophon
B2) What sacred rites did Demeter establish here after her visit?
ANS: Eleusinian Mysteries
20. TOSSUP) Give the Latin verb and its English meaning from which we derive
“coil,” “cull,” “lesson,” and “eligible.”
ANS: e =gather/collect/read
B1) Give the Latin verb and its English meaning from which we derive “vintage”
and “impromptu.”
ANS: e = buy/purchase
B2) Give the Latin verb and its English meaning from which we derive “danger.”
ANS: domus=home

Harvard Certamen 2010
Advanced Round 2
1. TOSSUP) Who rescued the consul Lucius Minucius from entrapment by the
Aequi after he was made dictator in 458 BC?
ANS: Cincinnatus
B1) On what mountain had Minucius’ forces been trapped?
ANS: Mt. Algidus
B2) Though elected dictator for sixteen months, how long did Cincinnatus
actually hold the dictatorship?
ANS: 16 days
2. TOSSUP) What Lydian outlaw forced passersby to work in his vineyard?
ANS: Syleus
B1) What hero finally killed and ended Syleus’ murderous antics?
ANS: Heracles
B2) Theseus was also famous for slaying bandits. What was the name of the
Crommyonian Sow slain by Theseus?
ANS: Phaea
3. TOSSUP) For the verb a e
a ē e, give the 2nd person plural, future active
indicative.
ANS: parebunt
B1) Keeping all else the same, change the form parebunt to the subjunctive.
ANS: There is no future subjunctive.
B2) Keeping all else the same, change the form parebunt to the pluperfect.
ANS: paruerant
4. TOSSUP) What derivative of the Latin noun
means “expletive” or
“obscenity”?
ANS: profanity
B1) What derivative of the Latin verb utor means “to seize and hold by force
without legal right”?
ANS: usurp
B2) What derivative of the Latin verb utor means “the practice of lending money
at an exorbitant rate”?
ANS: usury
5. TOSSUP) In what speech of Cicero, delivered in the year of his consulship, does
the orator defend a consul-elect against charges of bribery during the election
brought against him by Cato the Younger?
ANS: Pro Murena
B1) In what speech of the following year does Cicero defend the citizenship of a
Greek poet on the basis that he had been a citizen of high order in Heraclea, a
town that had been granted full Roman rights?
ANS: Pro Archia Poeta

B2) Put the following speeches of Cicero in chronological order: Pro Milone,
Pro Caelio, Pro Roscio Amerino, and the Actiones In Verrem.
ANS: Pro Roscio Amerino, Actiones In Verrem, Pro Caelio, Pro Milone
6. TOSSUP) What pious sister disobeyed her uncle’s edicts and in order to bury her
brother Polyneices?
ANS: Antigone
B1) Who was this uncle and current ruler of Thebes?
ANS: Creon
B2) Who was the unfortunate son of Creon and fiancé of Antigone who was
unable to rescue her from punishment?
ANS: Haemon
7. TOSSUP) What is the meaning of the Latin impersonal verb “grandinat”?
ANS: It hails
B1) What Latin impersonal verb means “it is snowing”?
ANS: ningit
B2) What Latin impersonal verb means “the dew falls”?
ANS: rorat
8. TOSSUP) Listen carefully to the following poem of Catullus, which I will read
twice as prose, and answer IN LATIN the question that follows:
ē b s be e
ab e a d ē a s s b d a e d ēb s s ē
a
e s bo a a e a a
ē a
s e a dd
e e
e sa e
e o
b s a
s ae s
a a
e s e s e os e e b s
be e a
a
ē s sa
s es a
e
Question:
ab
de a e
a d ē b ab
sa d a
?
ANS: a s d ēb s
B1)
ae
e ēs e e da s
ab
?
ANS: bo a a e a a
ē a
a d da e a
s sa ēs
o ēs a
s
B2)
debe ab
s ae ēs sē
o
e?
ANS: sa
s a
es ē s a
e
9. TOSSUP) Which of the following English words, if any, is not derived from the
same Latin root as the others: volubility, evolution, revolver, volition?
ANS: Volition
B1) Which of the following English words, if any, is not derived from the same
Latin root as the others: regicide, surge, regent, rail.
ANS: They are all derived from the same root.
B2) From what Latin noun are the English nouns “molestation” and “demolition”
derived?
ANS:
es

10. TOSSUP) According to tradition, which Roman king divided the Roman people
into five wealth classes and built a large wall around the city?
ANS: Servius Tullius
B1) Which Roman king built the pons sublicius?
ANS: Ancus Marcius
B2) Which Roman king is credited with building the cloaca maxima?
ANS: L. Tarquinius Priscus (or Superbus)
11. TOSSUP) Asinaria, Stichus, Epidicus, Trinummus, Cistellaria, Mostellaria, and
Miles Gloriosus are all works by what Roman comic playwright?
ANS: (Titus Maccius/Maccus) Plautus
B1) In what play of Plautus does the character Lyconides seduce Phaedra, the
daughter of an old miser named Euclio, who, earlier in the play, discovers a pot of
treasure?
ANS: Aulularia
B2) What play of Plautus concerns a haunted house?
ANS: Mostellaria
12. TOSSUP) What priests first appointed by Numa Pompilius served Mars and had a
name which implied they “danced around”?
ANS: Salii
B1) What priests, first appointed by Numa, served specific gods? Their name is
often confused for the Latin word for “breezes.”
ANS: Flamines
B2) What priestly position came to replace the rex sacrorum?
ANS: Pontifex Maximus
13. TOSSUP) In Book 1 of Vergil’s Aeneid, who speaks the following lines, which I
will read as prose: “
ēs o
e de
e ae e s e s
e s
et fulmine terres,
d e s e eas
ē o
e e a
d oes
potuere, quibus, tot funera passis, cunctus ob Italiam terrarum clauditur
orbis.”?
ANS: Venus
B1) Who speaks these lines in Book 6 of the Aeneid: “Nunc age, Dardaniam
oe
ae de de se
o a
a ea
a de e e e o ēs
inlustris animas nostrumque in nomen ituras, e ed a d s e e a a a
do eb .”?
ANS: Anchises
B2) Who speaks these line in Book 12 of the Aeneid, and to whom are they
addressed: “
ē
s o s d ē e
e
e
a as e
uulnere, Pallas
o a e oe a s e e a e sa
es
.”?
ANS: Aeneas, Turnus (respectively)
14. TOSSUP) From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive the English
nouns “morsel” and “remorse”?
ANS: o de =bite, eat

B1) What English adjective meaning “sharply caustic or sarcastic” is derived
from o de ?
ANS: mordant
B2) What English noun synonymous with “corrosion” is derived from o de ?
ANS: mordication
15. TOSSUP) With what handsome youth did both Apollo and Zephyrus fall in love?
ANS: Hyacinth(us)
B1) In Greek mythology, Zephyrus was which wind?
ANS: West wind
B2) In Greek mythology, who was the north wind?
ANS: Boreas
16. TOSSUP) What use of the subjunctive is illustrated in the following Latin
sentence?:
ed
s d a e e oss
s
ANS: Subjunctive with verbs of hindering/refusing
B1) What use of the subjunctive is illustrated in the following Latin sentence?:
ē
e ē
ANS: Relative Clause of Characteristic
B2) What use of the subjunctive is illustrated in the following Latin sentence:
esse
s s
s
a ē
s e s a
a d
ANS: Cum-circumstantial
17. TOSSUP) Differentiate in meaning between ē s and reus.
ANS: ē s=oar, reus=defendant
B1) Differentiate in meaning between quercus and queror.
ANS: quercus=oak, queror=complain
B2) Differentiate in meaning between nummus and nemus.
ANS: nummus=coin, nemus=grove
18. TOSSUP) What emperor built a new colony named Aelia Capitolina on the site of
Jerusalem?
ANS: Hadrian
B1) What was Hadrian’s full name?
ANS: Publius Aelius Hadrianus
B2) To what wife of Trajan was Hadrian indebted for largely engineering his
adoption?
ANS: Plotina
19. TOSSUP) What Silver Age Latin author composed a Panegyricus dedicated to
the emperor Trajan, who also served as the addressee of many of his letters?
ANS: (Gaius Plinius Caecilius Secundus) Pliny the Younger
B1) Despite the fact the he had no children, what politically advantageous right,
which had also been given to his friends Martial and Suetonius, was granted to
Pliny the Younger by the emperor Trajan?
ANS: Ius (Trium) Li erōr m

B2) To what friend does Pliny address letter 6.16, which contains his famous
description of the eruption of Mt. Vesuvius and the death of his uncle?
ANS: (Publius/Gaius Cornelius) Tacitus
20. TOSSUP) Which impious leader of Penelope’s suitors was the first to be slain by
Odysseus?
ANS: Antinous
B1) What friendly suitor did Odysseus try to warn in vain before the slaughter
began?
ANS: Amphinomous
B2) Which suitor of Penelope tried to pacify Odysseus with a bribe of twenty
oxen?
ANS: Eurymachus

Harvard Certamen
Advanced Round 3
TOSS-UP 1: The Harvard Classical Club hopes you are enjoying the tournament so far. The
Club also hopes you are enjoying your visit to Harvard's campus today, and that you can get to
know Harvard a little bit better during your time here. There is a lot to learn, because Harvard
has been around for a long time. In fact, it started in the year 1636, and we are now 374 years
from the founding of the founding of the university. Using your knowledge of a famous Latin
phrase abbreviated A.U.C., say in Latin: from the founding of the university. AB
UNIVERSITATE CONDITA
Bonus: Using your knowledge of a similar Latin phrase abbreviated A.U.C., say in Latin:
in the year of the university's founding. ANNO UNIVERSITATIS CONDITAE
Bonus: Of course, Harvard wasn't a true university then, but strictly a college. From
what Latin word is college derived? LEX (not lego)
TOSS-UP 2: You all probably know that Harvard's motto is Veritas, which means truth. But
please translate another early motto of Harvard, Christo et Ecclesiae. FOR CHRIST AND THE
CHURCH
Bonus: Christo et Ecclesiae kept with Harvard's early role as a training ground for
puritan ministers. The phrase was contrasted to “Baccho et Bacchantibus” in a speech
contemporary to Harvard's founding. What is being referenced by the terms Baccho and
Bacchantibus? BACCHUS, the BACCHANTS/MAENADS/followers of
BACCHUS/DIONYSUS, etc.
Bonus: One of Harvard's early presidents, the diminutive Uriah Oaks, published in a
study on astronomy from his youth: parvum parva decent, sed inest gratia sua parvis. Translate
that. SMALL THINGS SUIT A SMALL MAN, BUT THEY HAVE THEIR OWN CHARM /
THERE IS ITS OWN PLEASING CHARM IN SMALL THINGS (accept anything that's
reasonably close)
TOSS-UP 3: One of the famous landmarks of Harvard Yard is the John Harvard Statue. Any
tour guide can tell you that the John Harvard Statue is famous for telling three lies: The school
wasn't founded on the date listed by the statue, the founder wasn't John Harvard, and the statue
does not actually depict John Harvard. Now say in Latin, "the statue lies three times." STATUA
MENTITUR TER
Bonus: Using the verb fallo, say angrily in Latin “the statue has deceived me.”
STATUA ME FEFELLIT
Bonus: Tell your teammates in Latin, “Don't believe the statue!” NOLITE CREDERE
STATUAE / CAVETE CREDATIS STATUAE / NE CREDIDERITIS STATUAE

TOSS-UP 4: The most imposing building in Harvard Yard is Widener Library, the centerpiece
of the largest university library system in the world. Widener houses 57 miles of bookshelves,
12 stacked levels, and approximately 3 million volumes, including a Gutenburg Bible. It was
funded with a donation in honor of Harry Elkins Widener, a young Harvard graduate and book
collector, who died during the sinking of the Titanic. What Roman aristocrat was famed for
establishing the first public library in Rome? ASINIUS POLLIO
Bonus: You will find lots of Catullus volumes in Widener. What brother of Asinius
Pollio was chided by Catullus for stealing napkins in Catullus 12? Asinius MARRUCINUS
Bonus: There lots of Vergil in there too. What Messianic Eclogue does Vergil address to
Pollio? the FOURTH ECLOGUE
TOSS-UP 5: The lawn in front of Sever Hall is called Tercentenary Theater. According to its
three Latin roots, and perhaps what you learned from an earlier question, what does tercentenary
mean? THREE HUNDRED YEAR(S)
Bonus: Using the same structural roots and your knowledge of Latin, including perhaps a
famous line of Vergil regarding those who are three and four times blessed, complete the
following analogy: tercentenary: three hundred years:: __________: four hundred years.
QUATERCENTENARY
Bonus: If ter means three times, and quater means four times, what means five times?
QUINQUIENS / QUINQUIES
TOSS-UP 6: [Note only to Moderator: “porcellian” is pronounced porsellian, accenting the
‘sell’] One of Harvard's oldest social clubs is the Porcellian. What is the meaning of the Latin
root of Porcellian? PIG / LITTLE PIG
Bonus: Porcellus is a special form of the Latin word Porcus. What kind of form is it?
DIMINUTIVE (don't accept masculine, singular, or anything else like that; the lead in specifies
what we're looking for)
Bonus: The motto of the Porcellian club is Dum vivimus vivamus. Translate that.
"WHILE WE LIVE (AS LONG AS WE ARE LIVING, etc.), LET US LIVE!"
TOSS-UP 7: The Harvard Classical Club has a long tradition of producing plays from antiquity.
In 1930 the club produced a play, rendered in metrical Latin, in which the title characters were
the sons of Moschus, though Sosicles and his brother were separated early in life. Give the Latin
title of this play, considered one of Plautus' greatest works, which also heavily influenced
Shakespeare's Comedy of Errors. MENAECHMI
Bonus: What early Roman comedy, produced by the Harvard Classical Club in 1935,
featured the exploits of a wily slave named Tranio who persuades the owner of a house that it is
haunted? MOSTELLARIA

Bonus: In 1893 the Harvard Classical Club staged a play written by Terence which
features characters named Antipho, Demipho, Phaedria, Chremes, and a title character who starts
all sorts of trouble by exploiting a law that an orphan girl must be married to her next of kin.
Name the play. PHORMIO
TOSS-UP 8: The Harvard Law school offers a semester-long course devoted entirely to Roman
Law. Previous final exams have consisted in part of identifying, for instance, the legal actions
that could be brought following a series of negligent mishaps that occur in the ancient Roman
forum. Some of the best original sources of Roman law are collected in the Corpus Iuris Civilis
compiled under the authority of what 6th-Century emperor who lived in Constantinople.
JUSTINIAN the first
Bonus: Students of the Roman law class become familiar with the four different
components of Justinian's Corpus Iuris Civilis. Name any one of them. (do not reveal possible
correct answers until after second bonus) (i) CODEX / CODE; (ii) DIGESTA / PANDECTAE
/ DIGESTs; (iii) INSTITUTIONES / INSTITUTEs; (iv) NOVELLAE constitutiones / NOVELS
(new constitutions, etc.)
Bonus: Name another. SEE LIST ABOVE
TOSS-UP 9: A number of films have adopted the Harvard Law School as their fictional setting.
What film might the Romans have called "Flava de iure"? LEGALLY BLONDE
Bonus: Which film which begins at the Harvard Law School might the Romans have
called Collegium? If you don't know the film, just give your best translation. The FIRM (the
guild, etc.)
Bonus: Which film set at the Harvard Law School might the Romans have called "Petitio
Papyri"? If you don't know the film, just give your best translation. the PAPER CHASE (the
pursuit/campaign for papyrus, etc.)
TOSS-UP 10: The Harvard Business School is located across the Charles River just to our
South. In an water atrium of Morgan Hall at the Business School is a nearly 500-square-foot
mosaic recovered from early imperial baths in Asia Minor. The mosaic is named after its central
figure, a deity who was the mother of most of the world's river gods and the Oceanids. She was
the wife and sister of Oceanus. Name her. TETHYS
Bonus: The Tethys mosaic was excavated from a city in Asia Minor built by Seleucus I
which he named for a member of his family, and which was also the birthplace of the Roman
historian Ammianus Marcellinus as well as Saint Luke. Germanicus died there in 19 AD. Name
the city. ANTIOCH
Bonus: Alexander the Great had camped at the future site of Antioch and sacrificed to
Zeus there. What role had Tethys played for Zeus' wife Hera during the Titanomachy? took her
for SAFEKEEPING to their home at the ends of the earth; also accept (as a poorer answer)

refused to let Great Bear/Callisto constellation set in the Ocean because Callisto had been Zeus'
concubine).
TOSS-UP 11: When you read an entry in the Oxford Classical Dictionary that concludes with
the signing initials E.B., it was written by Ernst Badian, professor emeritus from the history
department here at Harvard. His office was right next door in Robinson Hall. Name the
historical figure whom Professor Badian describes in the following lines from the Oxford
Classical Dictionary: “In 198, with some opposition but with the support of the veterans he had
settled, he was elected consul and sent to take over the war against Philip V with a new army and
a new political approach.... In spring 197, after gaining the alliance of most of Greece, he
decisively defeated Philip by superior tactical skill at Cynoscephalae.” Titus Quinctius
FLAMININUS (not Flaminius)
Bonus: Fill in the following blank from that same entry: Flamininus “thus secured a
balance of power in the north, but gravely offended the Aetolians, making them eager to
welcome Antiochus III. In spectacular ceremony he announced the unrestricted freedom of the
Greeks in Europe at the BLANK of 196.” ISTHMIA / ISTHMIAN GAMES (The actual quote
says “Isthmia”)
Bonus: Fill in the following blank from that same entry: “In 183, sent to Asia on an
embassy, Flamininus unsuccessfully tried to intervene in Peloponnesian affairs on his way, then
took it upon himself to demand the extradition of BLANK from Prusias.” HANNIBAL
TOSS-UP 12: As part of John Quincy Adams' examination for entrance into Harvard, he was
required to construe three stanzas of a certain work composed to celebrate a festival in 17 B.C.
Name this choral hymn, whose title has been translated as the “song of ages” or “centennial
ode,” which was composed by Horace and performed by a choir of 27 boys and 27 girls at the
ludi saeculares. CARMEN SAECULARE
Bonus: During his entrance examination, Adams was required to parse the word
“silvarum,” which appears in the first line of the Carmen Saeculare: Phoebe silvarumque potens
Diana. Live up to his legend, and explain the case and use of silvarum in that line. GENITIVE
with SPECIAL ADJECTIVES (i.e. potens takes the genitive)
Bonus: In what meter, named after a famous Greek poetess, is the Carmen Saeculare
composed? SAPPHICs
TOSS-UP 13: John Quincy Adams wasn't finished. He was then asked to translate a passage of
contemporary English into Latin on the spot. The passage began: “There cannot certainly be a
higher ridicule than to give an air of importance to amusements.” Adams translated that part as
follows: “Nihil profecto risu dignior quam magni aestimare delectamenta.” Your question is
this: explain why Adams put risu in the ablative case. SPECIAL ADJECTIVES with DIGNUS
takes the ablative
Bonus: Using this particular type of verb form with dignus is rare but not wrong.
Perhaps Adams was showing off. What type of form is risu? SUPINE

Bonus: Now explain the case and use of magni in that sentence. GENITIVE of VALUE
/ WORTH
TOSS-UP 14: Even this wasn't enough to admit Adams to Harvard – there was still the Greek
portion of the exam. Specifically, Adams was asked to translate a number of lines from the
beginning of Book 4 of the Iliad. He got most of it right, and was accepted. In that book of the
Iliad, what archer is encouraged by Athena in disguise to take a shot at Menelaus? PANDARUS
Bonus: Agamemnon quickly sends a herald to fetch a doctor for his wounded brother.
Name the herald. TALTHYBIUS
Bonus: The doctor, a son of Asclepius, soon arrives. Name the doctor. MACHAON
TOSS-UP 15: This is a visual question. I will pass out the visuals face down. Do not turn them
over until instructed…. Now that everyone has a copy of the visual, please turn them over and
take 10 seconds to review…. Erich Segal, a notable Harvard alumnus, passed away in February.
Segal was an admired scholar of the classics, but much more famous for his popular works of
literature, which included the Harvard-inspired novel and screenplay, Love Story. Segal was
also the Latin Salutatorian for the class of 1958, and delivered the Latin salutatory at
commencement in that year right outside this building. Which excerpt of Segal's Latin
Salutatory, A, B, C or D, parodies a line from Catullus 5? answer is B (cf. Vivamus, mea
Lesbia, atque amemus ... nox est perpetua una dormienda.)
Bonus: Which excerpt parodies a line of Lucretius? answer is A (cf. De Rerum Natura
1.101, Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum)
Bonus: Which excerpt parodies a line from Horace's Odes? answer is D (cf. Odes 3.13,
O fons Bandusiae, splendidior vitro)
TOSS-UP 16: What deity, who was suckled in infancy by goats until discovered by the goatherd
Aresthanes, and who was the son of Apollo and Coronis, had his name adopted in the title of a
early club of the Harvard Medical School because of his powers for healing? ASCLEPIUS /
AESCULAPIUS
Bonus: The Aesculapian Club, as it was called after his Roman name, held an annual
dinner. The Harvard Archives retains the dinner favors from these meetings, which often
involved a symbol with which Aesculapius was associated, especially snakes. From what city
had the Romans initially introduced Aesculapius in order to cure a plague in the city, bringing
him in the form of a huge statuary snake? EPIDAURUS
Bonus: In 1910, dinner guests of the Aesculapian Club received a blue glass sculpture of
an animal which was often sacrificed to Asclepius. According to Plato's Apology, Socrates' final
request was a sacrifice of this animal to Asclepius. Name the animal, which was called
Alectryon in ancient Greek based on its own mythic origins. ROOSTER (if "chicken," prompt
for more information)

TOSS-UP 17: Every year Harvard and Yale look forward to the grand showdown of their bitter
rivalry, known simply as “The Game.” I will describe for you a play from a Harvard-Yale
football game in which Harvard once again vanquishes the Elis of New Haven, and you will tell
me which battle of the Punic Wars it most resembles. Listen carefully. Yale is confident on its
home field. It knows that Harvard has come a long way to New Haven and must be weary. And
the weather is bitter cold. Harvard's offense breaks their huddle to come to the line of
scrimmage. Yale meets them there, ready to dominate. But Harvard takes a time out, and goes
back to their bench to warm up with their portable heaters. Yale awaits them, motionless at the
line of scrimmage to prove their mettle. But Harvard takes another timeout while Yale vigilantly
awaits, still poised at the line of scrimmage. Then Harvard takes a third time out. By now, the
Yalies are getting frozen and frustrated. Harvard finally comes to line of scrimmage, warm,
refreshed, and ready to attack. The ball is snapped and the Yalies wilt under the pressure,
especially when Harvard runs an unforeseen end-around to ambush Yale's tired defense. It's a
big play for the men of Cambridge. Go Crimson! TREBIA river
Bonus: Who was the losing general at the battle of the Trebia River? SEMPRONIUS
longus
Bonus: At what battle did Hannibal score another major victory, this time against
Flaminius, one year later? LAKE TRASIMENE
TOSS-UP 18: There is also a long historic rivalry between the Harvard Crimson newspaper and
the Harvard Lampoon humor publication. In 1953, the Crimson editors pranked the Lampoon by
stealing the large copper Ibis perched atop Lampoon headquarters and presenting it as a gift to a
Soviet ambassador on behalf of the students of America, all at the height of the Cold War. What
Roman poet wrote a work entitled Ibis, which did not address this scandalous Crimson prank, but
rather cursed the poet's exile to the far off land of Tomis under the reign of Augustus for
similarly pushing the limits too far. Publius OVIDius naso
Bonus: The Lampoon has pulled a few pranks of its own. According to legend,
Lampoon president Conan O'Brien led a group of students pretending to be construction workers
to jackhammer a sidewalk in Boston. He called the Boston police to complain that students were
posing as construction workers to destroy a sidewalk. Then he called the state police to
complain that students were posing as Boston police to obstruct his construction crew. Hilarity
ensued, and somehow Conan didn't suffer expulsion. By what three word Latin phrase did Ovid
explain the reason of his expulsion and exile from Rome? CARMEN ET ERROR
Bonus: According to Lampoon legend, the best prank of 1933 was purloining the sacred
cod, a nearly five-foot statue of a fish that hangs prominently in the chamber of the
Massachusetts House of Representatives. It was quietly returned. What work on fishing has
sometimes been attributed to Ovid? HALIEUTICA
TOSS-UP 19: The oldest building in the Yard is Massachusetts Hall, built in 1720. When
George Washington first took command of the Continental Army, he did so at the Cambridge
Common just past Massachusetts Hall, and the building itself sheltered soldiers of his army.

Using your knowledge of a golden age literary work, or of a primordial deity of mythology and
the Greek title of a Hesiod work, or simply of Greek roots, what does the name George imply?
EARTH WORK / AGRICULTURE / FARMING, etc.
Bonus: Washington had left his plow much like Cincinnatus to take command of the
army, and was a skilled and innovative farmer. What powerful Roman politician of the 2d
century BC discussed his farming expertise in a treatise on agriculture. CATO the ELDER
Bonus: During his stay in Cambridge, Washington lived in a house later owned by the
poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, now a National Historic Site on Brattle Street called the
Longfellow House. Longfellow wrote his poem Evangeline entirely in dactylic hexameters, an
uncommon feat for the English language. What early Roman author paved the way for use of
dactylic hexameters in Latin with his work the Annales. Quintus ENNIUS
TOSS-UP 20: When you think Harvard, think sports. The college offers 41 Division 1 sports,
more than any other institution in the country, and has collected 138 NCAA national
championships despite not offering athletic scholarships. The Harvard crew team would love to
recruit what helmsman of Aeneas, as long as he stays awake? PALINURUS
Bonus: Harvard also has 28 club sports. Which character from the Aeneid, who won a
boxing match against Dares, would be a great addition Harvard's boxing club? ENTELLUS
Bonus: What bowman, who won the archery contest at the funeral games of Anchises by
shooting a dove out of the sky, could help Harvard's Archery club? EURYTION

HARVARD CERTAMEN - ROUND 3 VISUAL, ALL LEVELS
Excerpts from Latin Salutatory of Erich Segal, ’58
A.
Tu primum praeses, purpurate Pusei, aster altissime. Te sequimur O delictum decus academiae cuius
rebus gestis nunc videmus, “Quantum religio possit suadere ... donorum!
(TRANSLATION): You first of all O purpled Pusey, starry summit, we follow your lead, the chosen glory
of academia. We see indeed your achievements prove the maxim, “God's influence gains affluence.”
************************************************************************************

B.
Carissimi ac doctissimi professores, sine vobis, vita enim una perpetua dormienda esset nox.
(TRANSLATION): Esteemed and learned professors, without your influence, life would be an
interminable sleepy night.
************************************************************************************

C.
Nec vos omittamus, puellae pulcherrimae Radcliffianae, quas socias studemus vivendi, ridendi, bibendi...
Musae nostrae, numquam maiora canamus
(TRANSLATION): Nor shall we overlook you, beautiful Radcliff demoiselles whom earnestly we seek as
companions for living, laughing and quaffing.... O our Muses, never can we sing a loftier theme.
************************************************************************************

D.
Donatores - (identidem donaturi ut speramus) vobis palma parata quod palmas nostras complestis. “O
fons Pecuniae splendidior vitro, nobis lucem -per- lucrum dedistis!”
(TRANSLATION): O generous bestowers of gifts (who'll give again and again, we hope!) “the palm is
yours,” for you've filled our palms. “O fount of funds more splendid than crystal,” you have given us
light-through-lucre!

Harvard Certamen 2010
Advanced Semi-Final Round
1. TOSSUP) What prominent Latin satirist invoked as his muse a certain “saeva
indignatio” in his bitter and painful attacks upon his literary targets, which
included, amongst others, foreigners, women, and the emperor Domitian?
ANS: Juvenal/ (Decimus Iunius) Iuvenalis
B1) For what charge was Juvenal banished from Rome in 83 A.D.?
ANS: For attacking a favorite actor of Domitian (Paris)
B2) In contrast to Juvenal’s sharp personal attacks, what earlier Roman satirist
and influence on Juvenal concerned himself more with observation and comical
representation than with the analysis of personal vices, as shown in his
Sermones?
ANS: Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus)
2. TOSSUP) What was the Latin term for the mid-day siesta, during which the
streets were as quiet and empty as they would be at midnight?
ANS: meridiatio
B1) Into how many horae was the Roman day divided?
ANS: 12
B2) What was the ancient term for the water-clock, which measured time by the
regulated flow of liquid?
ANS: clepsydra
3. TOSSUP) Eurydice, Nycteis, Agave and Antigone were members of the royal
house of what ancient city?
ANS: Thebes
B1) The following women are members of the royal dynasty of what other ancient
city: Cleopatra, Creusa, Themiste, Callirrhoe?
ANS: Troy
B2) The following women are members of the royal dynasty of what other ancient
city: Herse, Agraulos, Procris, Philomela?
ANS: Athens
4. TOSSUP) Listen carefully to the following passage, which I will read twice, and
answer IN LATIN the question that follows:
de a
o
s ae a
o es e
ē
a
o e dē ē a es oe
a
e
e
a d
s
a ē e e e
de
a s s
e a sē o e e oe sse
da
o ē
o
s a
e s as
s
be
o
oe s d
e
Question:
od oe
oe ē
sē o e e e
de
a
sustinuerant?
ANS: e
e
a d
s
B1) e
d
o
s
ad
a
a
o dē ē a es

B2)

ANS: e de a
o
s
ē
s e s s
s be
ANS: Marcus Porcius Cato

ae a
o

oe

o es

e

s

d

e

5. TOSSUP) What notable Roman politician convinced the wavering spirits of the
Senate to stand firm and continue the fight against Pyrrhus of Epirus, despite the
devastating loss Rome had suffered at Heraclea?
ANS: (Appius) Claudius Caecus
B1) What ambassador, sent to the Senate by Pyrrhus, remarked that the Senate
seemed to him like an “assembly of kings?”
ANS: Cineas
B2) What Roman ambassador, sent by the Senate to exchange prisoners with
Pyrrhus, refused the bribes offered to him by the king of Epirus, thus
exemplifying Roman virtue?
ANS: (Gaius) Fabricius
6. TOSSUP) What unfinished work of Ovid, originally dedicated to the emperor
Augustus but ultimately dedicated to Germanicus, consists of six books, one for
each of the first six months of the year?
ANS: The Fasti
B1) What other work of Ovid consists of twenty-one epistles in elegiac couplet,
eighteen of which are addressed by heroines of mythological legend to their
lovers or husbands?
ANS: The Heroides
B2) What other work of Ovid consists of three books, the first two of which give
men advice on how to seduce women, and the third of which gives women advice
on how to seduce men?
ANS: Ars Amatoria
7. TOSSUP) Differentiate in meaning between
s and
s.
ANS:
s/rope, cord;
us/ death, funeral
B1) Differentiate in meaning between paulisper and a s.
ANS: paulisper/little, a s/swamp
B2) Differentiate in meaning between secus and se
s.
ANS: secus/otherwise; se
s/axe, hatchet
8. TOSSUP) What priest of Apollo is the father of Elais, Spermo, and Oino,
collectively known as the “Winegrowers”?
ANS: Anius
B1) What Greek leader kidnapped the “Winegrowers” to feed his army?
ANS: Agamemnon
B2) When Agamemnon tried to abduct Anius’s daughters, they prayed to
Dionysus and were saved. Into what animals were the girls transformed to escape
Agamemnon?
ANS: (white) doves

9. TOSSUP) In the Roman arena, what type of gladiator carried a lasso?
ANS: Laqueator
B1) What type of gladiator used two daggers?
ANS: Dimachaerus
B2) What type of gladiator used a net?
ANS: Retiarius
10. TOSSUP) What Roman emperor of the second century A.D. assigned to Lollius
Urbicus, the governor of Britain, the task of constructing a defensive wall in
Scotland as a defensive measure against lowland tribes present there?
ANS: Antoninus Pius
B1) What earlier governor of Britain under the Flavian emperors had constructed
a road across the Tyne-Solway isthmus and established Roman dominance in
Scotland for a brief period of time?
ANS: (Gnaeus Iulius) Agricola
B2) What immediate predecessor of Agricola made successful campaigns against
the Silures, thus setting the groundwork future Roman campaigns in northern
England and Scotland?
ANS: (Sextus Iulius) Frontinus
11. TOSSUP) What impersonal Latin verb lies at the root of the English noun
“leisure”?
ANS: licet
B1) What Latin noun lies at the root of the English noun “level”?
ANS: libra
B2) What Latin noun lies at the root of the English noun “cousin”?
ANS: soror
12. TOSSUP) Though he wrote works in many different genres, including fabulae
palliatae entitled Romulus and Clastidium, what Roman writer is most famous
for his poem on the Second Punic War, entitled Bellum Punicum?
ANS: (Gnaeus) Naevius
B1) Out of respect for Naevius, what later author omitted the First Punic War
from his poetic treatment of Roman history?
ANS: (Quintus) Ennius
B2) Name the meters which Naevius and Ennius wrote in, respectively.
ANS: Saturnian and Dactylic Hexameter
13. TOSSUP) What use of the ablative case is seen in the following sentence?
Quinquaginta denariis vendidit Marcus porcum suum.
ANS: Ablative of (definite) price
B1) What poetic use of the dative is seen in the following sentence? Tendimus
Romae.
ANS: Direction

B2) What poetic, Hellenizing use of the genitive case is found in the following
sentence? foederis heu taciti
ANS: Genitive of Exclamation
14. TOSSUP) Who was the only one of the Pleiades to marry a mortal?
ANS: Merope
B1) How many of the Pleiades did Zeus seduce?
ANS: three
B2) Name any two of Zeus’s children by the Pleiades.
ANS: (any two of) Dardanus, Iasion, Lacedaemon, Hermes
15. TOSSUP) Give the ablative singular of the phrase “nullus bos”
ANS: nulli bovi
B1) Make “nulli bovi” plural
ANS: nullis bobus
B2) Make “nullis bobus” accusative
ANS: nullos boves
16. TOSSUP) What work of later Latin literature allowed the masses access to the
Old and New Testament by translating them into Latin?
ANS: The Vulgatus/Vulgate
B1) What Latin author, who also had a deep admiration for pagan literature, was
the author of this translation?
ANS: (Saint Eusebius Hieronymus) Jerome
B2) What other work of Jerome, modeled on a work of the same name by
Suetonius, consists of a series of notices on 135 Christian writers and follows
closely the work of Eusebius, who had dealt with the same authors?
ANS: De Viris Illustribus
17. TOSSUP) Differentiate in meaning between then Latin nouns caterva and
catena.
ANS: caterva- crowd, throng; catena- chain
B1) Differentiate in meaning between the Latin words advenio and advena.
ANS: advenio- arrive; advena- stranger, foreigner
B2) Differentiate in meaning between lavo and levo.
ANS: lavo- wash, levo- lift, lighten, polish, restore
18. TOSSUP) What son of Aphrodite and king of Sicily lost a wrestling match to
Heracles in a bet over the hero’s herd?
ANS: Eryx
B1) According to some accounts, what Argonaut, who was the father of Eryx by
Aphrodite, jumped overboard and swam towards the Sirens?
ANS: Butes
B2) What later Sicilian king hosted Aeneas on his way to Italy?
ANS: Acestes

19. TOSSUP) Who suffered the political effects of damnatio memoriae after he was
assassinated on December 26, 211 A.D. by his brother and co-emperor Caracalla?
ANS: (Publius Septimius) Geta
B1) While campaigning against the Parthians, at what site, also the location at
which Crassus had suffered a devastating loss over two hundred years prior, was
Caracalla in turn assassinated by his successor, M. Opellius Macrinus?
ANS: Carrhae
B2) At what site was Macrinus defeated by the soon-to-be emperor Elagabalus in
218 A.D.?
ANS: Antioch
20. TOSSUP) What Latin verb, with what meaning, is at the root of the English word
“decay”?
ANS: cado / to fall
B1) What Latin noun, with what meaning, is at the root of the English word
“danger”?
ANS: domus / house
B2) What Latin noun, with what meaning, is at the root of the English word
“genitive”?
ANS: gigno / to give birth

Harvard Certamen 2010
Advanced Final Round
1. TOSSUP) What giant was born when Zeus, Poseidon, and Hermes urinated on and then
buried the hide of a bull?
ANS: Orion
B1) What king of Thrace provided this bull hide to the gods?
ANS: Hyrieus
B2) What first wife of Orion was sent down to Hades for boasting that she was more
beautiful than Hera?
ANS: Side
2. TOSSUP) Give the Latin verb and its English meaning from which we derive “doge,”
“subdue,” and “redoubt.”
ANS: d
/lead, guide, draw, direct
B1) From what Latin root with what English meaning is the word “vanilla” derived?
ANS: vagina/scabbard, sheath
B2) From what Latin root with what English meaning is the word “auburn” derived?
ANS: albus/white
3.

TOSSUP) Listen to the following list of typical relationships: son-father, guest-host,
killer-victim. Which of these relationships describes the following set of mythological
couples: Patroclus and Menoetius, Pittheus and Pelops, Orestes and Agamemnon,
Achilles and Peleus.
ANS: son-father
B1) Listen to the following list of mythological occupations: cup-bearer, herdsman,
archer, priest. Which of these occupations best describes the following list of
mythological figures: Agelaus, Tyrrhus, Cephalion, Menoetes, Philoetes
ANS: herdsman
B2) Carolus Linnaeus, the father of modern taxonomy, divided the animal kingdom into
six classes, Vermes, Insecta, Mamalia, Pisces, Amphibia, and Aves. Many mythological
characters transform into animals that belong in these classes. Listen to the following list
of transformed characters and indicate their animal class, as described by Carolus
Linnaeus: Aesacus, Alectryon, Nisus, Asteria
ANS: Aves

4. TOSSUP) Translate into English the protasis of the following condition: “If I had been
king, I would have been rich.”
ANS: s ē fuissem
B1) Translate the apodosis in the following condition: “If I had were king, I would be
rich.”
ANS: dives essem
B2) What use of the subjunctive is found in the following Latin sentence: de
d
metuant?
ANS: clause of proviso

5. TOSSUP) During which Emperor’s reign were the following provinces created:
Mauretania Tingitana, Mauretania Caesariensis, Noricum, Britannia?
ANS: Claudius
B1) What is the modern name for the ancient city of Tingis, which served as the capital
of Mauretania Tingitana?
ANS: Tangier
B2) In what modern-day country is Tangier, and the rest of the old province of
Mauretania Tingitana, located?
ANS: Morocco
6. TOSSUP)
d
ANS: girdle
B1)
d
ēs
ANS: bath
B2)
d
ēs
ANS: whale

ēs

a

balteus”?

a

balneum”?

a

balaena”?

7. TOSSUP) What poet writes about Chloe, Glycera, Lydia, Leuconoe and Pyrrha in his
four books of lyric poetry, entitled the Odes?
ANS: Horace
B1) Which of those women is the subject of a poem that begins “Quis multa te gracilis
puer in rosa…”?
ANS: Pyrrha
B2) Which of those women is the addressee of a poem that begins “tu ne quaesieris…”
ANS: Leuconoe
8. TOSSUP) Most people have heard that the year 69 AD is known in Roman history as
“the year of the four emperors.” 69 AD was not, however, the year during which the
greatest number of emperors reigned. During which year of the Western Roman Empire
did no less than six men serve as emperor?
ANS: 238 AD
B1) Name two of these men.
ANS: *DO NOT READ FULL LIST UNTIL AFTER BONUS 2!*
Maximinus Thrax, Gordian I, Gordian II, Balbinus, Pupienus, Gordian III
B2) Name two more.
ANS:* See list above*
9. TOSSUP) Give the future infinitive of a s o .
ANS: a
s esse
B1) For the verb dē e s o , give the 3rd person plural, pluperfect subjunctive.
ANS: dē ess esse
B2) For the verb e e s o , give the perfect infinitive.
ANS: e e ē s esse

10. TOSSUP) What theological work of Cicero concerns the ideas of various Greek
philosophical schools on the nature of gods?
ANS: De Natura Deorum
B1) What work of Cicero is also called the Laelius?
ANS: De Amicitia
B2) What work of Cicero has a title that translates as “Discussions at Tusculum”?
ANS: Tusculanae Disputationes
11. TOSSUP) Which of the following English words, if any, is not derived from the same
Latin root as the others: transit, seditious, sudden, residential?
ANS: residential
B1) From what Latin root with what English meaning are the words “county,”
“seditious,” and “sudden” derived?
ANS: e /go
B2) From what Latin adjective with what English meaning is the word “mollusk”
derived?
ANS: mollis/soft, gentle, pleasant, pliant
12. TOSSUP) Listen carefully to the following passage, which I will read twice, and answer
IN LATIN the question that follows:
dēb s e
e dēas
o e o e e
os a
s ēs e
de
e
s ē
se
s se
a e
o
ab e
e
e
ē e d s ēde e
d ē a sedēba e a
ē b
a
a ea sed s s e
ēs ē ae
The Question:
s ēs
e
sa
s ē
ANS: Scriptor
B1)
ae ēs e a
s
s
ANS:
se
ēs ē ae
B2) ē
a as
o d s ess ab e
s
ēs a
s a e e.
ANS: falsum
13. TOSSUP) What silver age theorist of oratory and rhetoric wrote the Institutio Oratoria
and coined the phrase “satura tota nostra est”?
ANS: Quintilian (Marcus Fabius Quintilianus)
B1) In what province of the Roman empire was Quintilian born?
ANS: Hispania
B2) Which of the following works, if any, was NOT written by Quintilian? De Causis
Corruptae Eloquentiae, Declamationes Minores, Summorum rhetorum.
ANS: Summorum rhetorum

14. TOSSUP) What word is synonymous with “quamquam” but takes a verb in the
subjunctive mood instead of the indicative?
ANS: quamvis
B1) What use of the subjunctive is found with quamvis?
ANS: concessive
B2) Name another word that can introduce a concessive subjunctive.
ANS: licet, ne
15. TOSSUP) Magnes, Deion, Cretheus, Athamas, Sisyphus, and Salmoneus are sons of what
early Greek?
ANS: Aeolus
B1) What earlier Greek was the father of Aeolus, Dorus, and Xuthus by the nymph
Orseis?
ANS: Hellen
B2) According to some traditions, Hellen was the eldest son of a famous mortal
mythological couple. Name Hellen’s mortal father and mother.
ANS: Deucalion and Pyrrha
16. TOSSUP) The suovetaurilia was a Roman ritual during which three different animals
were sacrificed. In English, what were these three animals?
ANS: Pig, Sheep/Ram, Bull
B1) To what Roman god were the animals being sacrificed?
ANS: Mars
B2) The suovetaurilia was a part of what ceremony, held for the purpose of spiritually
purifying the land?
ANS: Lustratio
17. TOSSUP) What Roman popularis politician, left with essentially dictatorial authority
after the death of his consular colleague Gaius Marius, used his power to overturn the
reactionary reforms that Sulla had implemented only two years earlier?
ANS: (Lucius Cornelius) Cinna
B1) Where was Sulla during the period from 86-85 B.C. that constituted this so-called
“Cinnanum Tempus,” and what was he doing there?
ANS: He was in Greece, fighting Mithridates VI (First Mithridatic War)
B2) What treaty between Mithridates and Sulla in 85 B.C. freed Sulla’s resources from
the burdens of the First Mithridatic War and ultimately allowed him to march on Rome
for the second time?
ANS: The Treaty of Dardanus

18. TOSSUP) What Latin leader in the war against the Trojans was conceived when a spark
from a hearth fire flew into his mother’s lap?
ANS: Caeculus
B1) What sons of Iphimedeia were born after their mother filled her lap with sea water?
ANS: Otus and Ephialtes
B2) What son of Nana and consort of Dindymene was conceived when an almond fell
from a tree into his mother’s lap?
ANS: Attis / Atys
19. TOSSUP) What use of the Accusative case is found in the following quotation from
Vergil: de s o
s s e sa
ee
?
ANS: Greek/Synecdochial Accusative; Accusative of Respect
B1) What use of the Accusative case is found in the following quotation from Cicero’s In
Verrem:
e
a
e e?
ANS: Cognate Accusative / Accusative of Kindred Signification
B2) What use of the Dative case is found in the following quotation from Horace: quid
mihi Celsus agit?
ANS: Ethical Dative
20. TOSSUP) While today we lack much of Livy’s writings, by the late Empire the Romans
lacked Livy’s work in a different sense: they could barely comprehend it. To ameliorate
this problem, who wrote a dumbed-down history of Rome from its origins to the middle
of the fourth century known as the Breviarum ab Urbe Condita?
ANS: Eutropius
B1) Moving to an earlier historian, give the title of the series of biographies of Julius
Caesar and the first eleven emperors of Rome, which was written in a manner
reminiscent of a tabloid by Suetonius.
ANS: De Vita Caesarum
B2) Whose work, the extant seventeen books of which provide us with information on
the reign of Julian the Apostate, was originally 31 books probably covering the period
from AD 96 to 378?
ANS: Ammianus Marcellinus

Extra Questions Advanced Round1
Myth:
TOSSUP) What son of Strophius was the faithful companion of Orestes?
ANS: Pylades
B1) Who became the wife of Pylades?
ANS: Electra
B2) How was Pylades related to Orestes?
ANS: brother-in-law OR cousin
History:
TOSSUP) What general suffered a disastrous defeat during Augustus’ reign in AD 9, losing
three Roman legions?
ANS: Varus
B1) Where did this terrible defeat occur?
ANS: Teutoberg Forest
B2) Who was the victorious Germanic leader who had defeated Varus?
ANS: Arminius (or Herman the German)
Grammar/Language:
TOSSUP) What use of the Subjunctive Mood can be found in the following sentence:
“ a se ds
e
es o dē e
ANS: Indirect Command
B1) What use of the Subjunctive can be found in this sentence: “
e a a e esse
delictum.”
ANS: Relative Clause of Characteristic
B2) What use of the Subjunctive can be found here: “
d a a dē
b s a
”
ANS: Delibrative
TOSSUP) Quid
ēs
a e e
ANS: immediately, forthwith
B1)
d
ēs
a
s a
ANS: nowhere, on no occasion
B2)
d
ēs
a
s s
ANS: again

Latin Literature:
TOSSUP) What Roman writer addresses poems to Cicero, Julius Caesar, Cornelius Nepos, and
Lesbia?
ANS: Catullus
B1) To what three beloveds does the elegist Tibullus address poems?
ANS: Delia, Marathus, Nemesis
B2) To what perhaps imaginary woman did Ovid address many of his Amores?
ANS: Corinna

Extra Questions Advanced Round 2
Myth:
TOSSUP) What son of Cinyras was fought over by two goddesses before he was gouged to death
by a wild boar?
ANS: Adonis
B1) What wife of Cinyras was not Adonis’s mother?
ANS: Cenchreis
B2) What daughter of Cinyras was, according to some accounts, Adonis’s mother?
ANS: Myrrha / Smyrna
History:
TOSSUP) Where did the Romans, under the commanders Titus Veturius and Spurius Postumius,
suffer a disastrous defeat at the hands of the Samnites in 321 BC?
ANS: Caudine Forks
B1) During which war did this battle occur?
ANS: Second Samnite War
B2) What humiliating action were the defeated Romans forced to undertake?
ANS: walk under the yoke
Grammar:
TOSSUP) For the verb tollo, tollere, give the first person, plural, pluperfect, active, subjunctive.
ANS: s s ssē s
B1) Change s s ssē s to the passive voice.
ANS: s b a esse s
B2) Change s b a esse s to the imperfect tense.
ANS: o e ē
TOSSUP) es ba s
o e a ēs
e e
s ae ē
as es ae ē
ANS: Ablativ
B1) Quae pars orationis est “perennius?”
ANS: Adiectivus
B2)
ae e so a e
e s es e e
ANS: prima et singularis

se e

e

o

e

Latin Literature:
TOSSUP) What first century A.D. Roman author composed works such as the unfinished
Achilleid as well as the more notable Thebaid?
ANS: Statius
B1) What work of Statius features poems on various subjects such as a friend's parrot and an
invocation to sleep?
ANS: Silvae
B2) What Flavian Emperor does Statius flatter in several of his poems?
ANS: Domitian

Extra Questions Advanced Round 3
Myth:
TOSSUP) Most accounts say that Hephaestus was the son of Hera alone. However some
accounts suggest that Hephaestus was the son of both Zeus and Hera. Excluding Hephaestus,
who are the other children of Zeus and Hera?
ANS: Ares, Hebe, Eileithyia
B1) Ares and Hephaestus quarreled about Aphrodite’s infidelity. Name Ares’s three children by
Aphrodite.
ANS: Eros, Deimus, Phobus
B2) What deity informed Hephaestus about Aphrodite’s infidelity?
ANS: Helius
History:
TOSSUP) What king of the Dacians had much success fighting against the Roman Empire
during the reign of Domitian, including victories over Oppius Sabinus and the praetorian prefect
Cornelius Fuscus?
ANS: Decebalus
B1) At what site in 88 A.D. did the Roman commander Tettius Iulianus finally achieve a
decisive victory over Decebalus?
ANS: Tapae
B2) What capital of the Dacian territory was finally captured by the emperor Trajan in 102 A.D.?
ANS: Sarmizegethusa/Sarmizegetusa
Grammar:
TOSSUP) For the phrase angustus adventus, give the Dative singular.
ANS: a
s ad e
B1) Change a
s ad e
to the Ablative.
ANS: a
s ad e
B2) Change a
s ad e
to the Genitive Plural.
ANS: a
s
ad e
TOSSUP) Translate the prepositional phrase in the following sentence into Latin: “The light is
on this side of the wall.”
ANS: cis murum
B1) Now translate the prepositional phrase in this sentence: “I am now in the teacher’s
presence.”
ANS: o a
a s
B2) Finally, translate the prepositional phrase in this sentence in two ways: “I went as far as
Rome before I stopped.”
ANS: e s o
e s o ae

Latin Literature:
TOSSUP) How many pairs of letters appear in Ovid’s Heroides?
ANS: three
B1) Name any of the three sets of lovers whose letters to each other are in the Heroides.
ANS: Paris and Helen, Hero and Leander, Acontius and Cydippe
B2) How many unpaired letters are there?
ANS: fifteen

Extra Questions Advanced Semi-finals
Myth:
TOSSUP) What son of Diores was the charioteer of Achilles?
ANS: Automedon
B1) What son of Priam was the charioteer and half-brother of Hector?
ANS: Cebriones
B2) What son of Capaneus was the charioteer of Diomedes?
ANS: Sthenelus
History:
TOSSUP) What title did Domitian assume that reflected his autocratic tendencies?
ANS: Dominus et Deus
B1) What practice resulted in Domitian’s name being removed from all public accounts after his
death?
ANS: a a
e o ae
B2) Domitian began the Forum Transitorium which was finished by which later emperor?
ANS: Nerva
Grammar/Language:
TOSSUP) Translate the following sentence into Latin using a perfect subjunctive verb: “Marcus,
don’t trust the angry senator!”
ANS: ē a ē ed de s a se a o
B1) Translate that same sentence, now using a form of the verb a e and the present
subjunctive.
ANS: a ē a ē ed s a se a o
B2) What form of the verb credo, credere can be used with the present active imperative of the
verb o
o e, to express that same sentence in Latin.
ANS: the present, active infinitive.
TOSSUP) What use of the Genitive Case can be found in the phrase “Casa es
ANS: (Indefinite) Value
B1) What use of the Genitive Case can be found in the phrase “ e s a o e
ANS: Objective Genitive
B2) What use of the Genitive Case can be found in this sentence: “ ē a
ANS: Charge/Penalty

a

”
d .”
”

Latin Literature:
TOSSUP) In what play of Plautus is the girl Philocomasium sought both by her lover Pleusicles
and by the braggart soldier Pyrgopolynices?
ANS: Miles Gloriosus
B1:
How many of the one hundred thirty plays attributed to Plautus survive today?
ANS: twenty
B2:
What is unique about Plautus's play Captivi?
ANS: there are no female characters

Extra Questions Advanced Finals
Myth:
TOSSUP) What Argonaut and son of Neleus could take whatever shape he liked in battle?
ANS: Periclymenus
B1) What Argonaut and son of Poseidon could run so swiftly over waves that his feet stayed
dry?
ANS: Euphemus
B2) Name the two prophets who accompany Jason and the Argo on the journey?
ANS: Mopsus and Idmon
History:
Where was the emperor Valens killed by Gallic hordes in AD 378?
ADRIANOPLE
Bonus 1: On what holiday did Stilicho defeat Alaric the Visigoth at Pollentia in AD 402?
EASTER
Bonus 2: Name the Vandal leader who sacked Rome in June, AD 455
GAESERIC
Vocabulary & Derivatives:
Toss-up: What do the meanings of the following Latin nouns have in common? Abolla, paenula,
sagulum, paludamentum.
Answer: They all refer to (kinds of) cloaks
Bonus: Which of those words for “cloak” specifically refers to a light, travelling cloak?
Answer: Paenula
Grammar:
Toss-up: Which of the following nouns does not belong because of gender? Tempus, virus,
mare, cursus, bellum, cetus.
Answer: Cursus (masculine; the others are neuter)
Bonus: What do the following nouns have in common? Balneum, rostrum, epulum, locus.
Answer: They are heterogeneous/they vary in gender
Reading Comp:
Listen carefully to the excerpt from Vergil’s Aeneid, which I will read twice as prose, and answer
IN LATIN the question that follows:
a e sa
ed
os
s ade a s des e s s e
o ēs a e d ēs a e
a
a a
s sed e o e ad
s e s e e ade e ad a
s o o s
abo es
Question:
a d es
a
s ae
ANS:
B1. Secundum sybillam, quid est facilis?
ANS:
B2. e
d
s b a
ae ēs s
d
ANS:

ēs

Latin Literature:
TOSSUP) What author, born around 250 A.D wrote De Ira Dei, asserting that the Christian god
is capable of wrath, and Institutiones Divinae, a defense of Christian doctrine as logical? He is
often called the “Christian Cicero”
LACTANTIUS
B1:
Like Lactantius, this writer also hailed from Africa though he was born roughly a
century later. He served as bishop of Hippo and wrote De Civitate Dei.
ST. AUGUSTINE
B2:
What writer, born in Africa about a century after Augustine, wrote a didactic allegory
entitled De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercuriis?
MARTIANUS CAPELLA

