Harvard Certamen 2010
Novice Round 1
1. TOSSUP) Complete the following analogy: laudo : laudabas :: sedēo :
________.
ANS: sedēbas
B1) Complete the following analogy: laudo : laudabas :: do : ______
ANS: dabas
B2) Complete the following analogy: laudo : laudabas :: audio : _______
ANS: audiebas
2. TOSSUP) In ancient Rome, was the job of the person known as the coquus?
ANS: cook / chef
B1) If the coquus were to make panis, what would he be making?
ANS: bread
B2) Suppose the coquus was cooking in the kitchen of a Roman house. What was
the Latin name for the kitchen?
ANS: culina
3. TOSSUP) What tribune of 133 B.C proposed a revolutionary land reform bill and
was killed for his radical politics?
ANS: Tiberius Gracchus
B1) What younger brother of Tiberius proposed another such bill ten years later?
ANS: Gaius (Gracchus)
B2) Who was the mother of the Gracchi, who called them her “jewels”?
ANS: Sempronia
4. TOSSUP) Which of the following does not belong because of meaning: mus, bos,
canis, stella, porcus?
ANS: stella
B1) : Which of the following does not belong because of meaning: unus, duo,
queror, quinque, septem?
ANS: queror
B2) Which of the following does not belong because of meaning: pes, caput,
umerus, grex, nasus?
ANS: grex
5. TOSSUP) What son of Oicles and Hypermnestra was reluctantly coerced into
joining the Seven Against Thebes after his wife had accepted a bribe?
ANS: Amphiarius
B1) Who was the wife of Amphiarius wife who had accepted this bribe?
ANS: Eriphyle
B2) What brother of Eriphyle joined the Seven Against Thebes despite the
warnings of Amphiarius?
ANS: Adrastus

6. TOSSUP) Translate the following sentence into English: “Video multas puellas
pulchras in foro Romano.”
ANS: I see many beautiful girls in the Roman forum.
B1) Translate the following sentence into English: “Nulla puella mihi amica
est.”
ANS: No girl is friendly to me/No girl is my girlfriend.
B2) Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Quare non puellae me amat?”
ANS: Why don’t (the) girls love/like me?
7. TOSSUP) In Latin, how many tenses can a verb take?
ANS: six
B1) How many voices are there for verbs in Latin?
ANS: two
B2) In what two ways must a verb agree with its subject in Latin?
ANS: person and number
8. TOSSUP) In what battle of AD 9 did the Romans suffer a disastrous defeat,
leading emperor Augustus to bewail “Give me back my legions!”
ANS: Teutoberg Forest
B1) The quote “Give me back my legions!” traditionally also includes the name
of the defeated Roman general. Name him.
ANS: (Quinctilius) Varus
B2) In what year did the Roman suffer defeat at Teutoberger Forest?
ANS: AD 9
9. TOSSUP) Give the correct form of the adjective bonus to agree with the noun
form servo.
ANS: bono
B1) Give the correct form of the adjective bonus to agree with templa.
ANS: bona
B2) Give the correct form of the adjective bonus to agree with agricolae.
ANS: boni/bono
10. TOSSUP) What daughter of King Acrisius was locked in a chamber to preserve
her maidenhood, only to be seduced by Zeus in the form of a golden shower?
ANS: Danae
B1) Danae and her child were locked in a chest and thrown into the ocean. Who
was her child?
ANS: Perseus
B2) They arrived on the island of Seriphus and were rescued by what kind
fisherman?
ANS: Dictys
11. TOSSUP) Which word does not belong by derivation: insular, isle, insist,
isolation?

ANS: insist
B1) From what Latin word are the other three words in the tossup derived?
ANS: insula
B2) From what Latin word with what meaning is irascible derived?
ANS: ira=anger
12. TOSSUP) Responde aut Anglice aut Latine: Quot tibi bracchia sunt?
ANS: Two/duo
B1) Responde aut Anglice aut Latin: Quot vobis oculi sunt?
ANS: Eight/octo, or number of people on team (e.g. three/tres, two/duo,
one/unus)
B2) Responde aut Anglice aut Latine: Quot nasones uni homini sunt?
ANS: One/unus
13. TOSSUP) Which of the following gods and goddesses was not born from the
same mother as the rest: Hades, Hera, Apollo, Poseidon, Demeter?
ANS: Apollo
B1) Who was the mother of Apollo?
ANS: Leto
B2) What is the Roman name for Apollo’s divine sister?
ANS: Diana
14. TOSSUP) In Rome, the lictores were a special class of civil servant whose job it
was to attend and guard certain magistrates. Which magistrate, during the time of
the Roman Republic, would have been attended by precisely twelve lictores?
ANS: Consul
B1) If a Roman was attended to by twice that number, 24 lictores, then what
office can we deduce that he held?
ANS: Dictator
B2) What was the Latin name for the highly symbolic bundle of rods and axe that
each lector carried?
ANS: Fasces
15. TOSSUP) What is the meaning of the Latin motto found on the Eagle’s beak in
the U.S. dollar bill, “E pluribus unum”?
ANS: One from many
B1) What is the meaning of “annuit coeptis,” also found on the bill?
ANS: He has favored/nodded upon our undertakings.
B2) What is the meaning of the third Latin phrase on the dollar bill, “novus ordo
seclorum?”
ANS: A new order of the ages
16. TOSSUP) Who was the mortal mother of the Greek god of wine, Dionysus?
ANS: Semele
B1) What sister of Semele, in a moment of confusion, tore the head off of her own
son.

ANS: Agave
B2) Name this murdered son.
ANS: Pentheus
17. TOSSUP) What use of the ablative case is found in the following sentence?
“Multis cum amicis meis ambulabam domum.”
ANS: Accompaniment
B1) What use of the ablative case is found in the following sentence? “Miles
Romanus necavit hostem gladio magno.”
ANS: Means/Instrument
B2) What use of the ablative case is found in the following sentence?: “Semper
orabo pro te, Caeli.”
ANS: Ablative with prepositions
18. TOSSUP) According to tradition, what Roman king was advised by the nymph
Egeria and created most of Rome’s religious institutions?
ANS: Numa Pompilius
B1) Name the Sabine king who was, briefly, Romulus’ co-ruler.
ANS: Titus Tatius
B2) Name the wife of Tarquinius Priscus, who divined that Servius Tullius was to
be the next king.
ANS: Tanaquil
19. TOSSUP) Differentiate in meaning between habeo and habito.
ANS: habeo=(to) have / hold, habito= (to) live (in) / dwell / inhabit
B1) Differentiate in meaning between mens and mensa.
ANS: mens= mind / intellect, mensa=table
B2) Differentiate in meaning between the prepositions ab and ad.
ANS: ab=from / away from / by, ad=to / toward / near
20. TOSSUP) In the structure and layout of a Roman house, what was a
“cubiculum?”
ANS: bedroom
B1) What was the term for the small chest containing personal or valuable items
that might be found in the cubiculum?
ANS: arca
B2) What was the term for the colonated garden that could be found beyond the
atrium in a Roman house?
ANS: peristylium

Harvard Certamen 2010
Novice Round 2
1. TOSSUP) For the verb facio, give the 2nd person singular, imperfect active
indicative.
ANS: faciebas
B1) Change faciebas to the 3rd person plural, perfect active indicative.
ANS: Fecerunt
B2) Change fecerunt to the 2nd person plural, present active imperative.
ANS: Facite.
2. TOSSUP) What Roman politician and writer fought against Vercingetorix during
his campaigns in Gaul?
ANS: (Gaius Julius) Caesar
B1) Who was Caesar’s chief opponent during the civil wars?
ANS: Pompey
B2) What famous Roman orator did Caesar unsuccessfully attempt to win over to
his side?
ANS: (Marcus Tullius) Cicero
3. TOSSUP) Differentiate in meaning between cado and caedo.
ANS: Cado is “to fall”; Caedo is “to kill”
B1) Differentiate in meaning between nix and nex
ANS: Nix is snow; Nex is murder, slaughter
B2) Differentiate in meaning between aestus and aestas
ANS: Aestus is heat, passion, sea tide; Aestas is summer
4. TOSSUP) Quaestor, Praetor and Consul were all offices in what sequence of
Roman political offices?
ANS: The cursus honorum
B1) What position, not officially a part of the cursus honorum, required its
holders to entertain the public with lavish spectacles?
ANS: aedile
B2) What position gave its holder the power of two consuls, and was reserved in
the early republic for extraordinary situations?
ANS: Dictator/dictator (they can pronounce it as Latin or English)
5. TOSSUP) What hero killed the Nemean Lion, defeated the Lernaean Hydra, and
captured the dog Cerberus while completing his famous twelve labors?
ANS: Heracles/Hercules
B1) Who was the taskmaser of Heracles, who hid himself in a gigantic jar
whenever the hero came back from a labor?
ANS: Eurystheus
B2) What daugther of Electryon was the mother of Heracles?
ANS: Alcmene (or Alcmena)

6. TOSSUP) Translate the following sentence into English: “Mater nostra vocabat
nos in culinam.”
ANS: Our mother was calling us/called us into the kitchen.
B1) Translate the following sentence into English: “Mater noster fecerat cenam
nobis.”
ANS: Our mother had made dinner for us.
B2) Translate the following sentence into English: “Mater nostra cenam non
dat patri nostro.”
ANS: Our mother does not give dinner to our dad.
7. TOSSUP) Which of the following English words does NOT belong by derivation:
Numismatic, numeration, number, numerous?
ANS: Numismatic
B1) We derive “numismatic” from the Latin noun “nummus.” What is the
meaning of this Latin noun?
ANS: Coin
B2) From what Latin noun with what meaning do we derive “number”?
ANS: Numerus=coin.
8. TOSSUP) Aided by Hera, what young man led a band of heroes to Colchis in
order to obtain the golden fleece?
ANS: Jason
B1) What ruler of Colchis refused to give Jason the fleece?
ANS: Aeetes
B2) One of the tasks Jason had to perform to get the fleece involved planting
dragons’ teeth. What other figure in classical mythology had to perform this task
while founding Thebes?
ANS: Cadmus
9. TOSSUP) In 285 AD what emperor established a new form of government known
as the tetrarchy?
ANS: Diocletian
B1) In this system of government, what were the two most powerful officials
called?
ANS: Augustus/Augusti
B2) What name was given to the officials who served directly under the Augusti?
ANS: Caesar/Caesares
10. TOSSUP) What is the meaning of the abbreviation “e.g.”, whose full form in
Latin is “exempli gratia”?
ANS: For (the sake of) example
B1) What is the full form in Latin of the abbreviation “i.e.”?
ANS: Id est
B2) What is the full form in Latin of the abbreviation “cf.”, which means
“compare”?

ANS: Confer
11. TOSSUP) What use of the genitive case is found in the following sentence?
“Canis Marci valde stupidus mihi videtur.”
ANS: Possession
B1) What use of the dative is found in the same sentence, “Canis Marci valde
stupidus mihi videtur”?
ANS: Reference
B2) In that sentence, what part of speech is “valde”?
ANS: Adverb
12. TOSSUP) What Olympian, the son of Zeus and Semele, delighted in drinking
wine and hosting raucous parties?
ANS: Dionysus/Bacchus
B1) Anatomically speaking, what was unusual about Bacchus’ birth?
ANS: He was born from a thigh (Zeus’ thigh)
B2) Bacchus did not become an Olympian instantly. What other deity gave him
her spot on Olympus?
ANS: Hestia/Vesta
13. TOSSUP) Say in Latin, “Tomorrow I will see my children.”
ANS: Cras liberos (meos) videbo.
B1) Using the word epistula, say in Latin: “Today I sent a letter to Italy.”
ANS: Hodie epistulam misi ad Italiam.
B2) Using the word epistula, say in Latin: “Yesterday I wanted to send a letter.”
ANS: Heri epistulam mittere volebam/volui.
14. TOSSUP) From what Latin verb with what meaning does the English noun
“deletion” derive?
ANS: Deleo (“destroy”)
B1) From what Latin verb with what meaning does the English noun “infection”
ultimately derive?
ANS: Facio (“I make, do”)
B2) From what Latin noun with what meaning does “virility” derive?
ANS: Vir (“man”)
15. TOSSUP) What daughter of the river Peneus did Apollo fall in love with after
Cupid shot him with an arrow?
ANS: Daphne
B1) What did Daphne turn into after she prayed to her father to deliver her from
Apollo’s advances?
ANS: A laurel tree
B2) What Roman poet desrcibes this episode in his Metamorphoses?
ANS: Ovid

16. TOSSUP) Translate the number “68” into Roman numerals.
ANS: LXVIII
B1) Translate “550” into Roman numerals.
ANS: DL
B2) Translate “1555” into Roman numerals.
ANS: MDLV
17. TOSSUP) What man, the elder son of Augustus’ second wife Livia, succeeded
Augustus to become the second emperor of Rome?
ANS: Tiberius
B1) Who was Rome’s third emperor?
ANS: Caligula
B2) Who was Rome’s fourth emperor?
ANS: Claudius
18. TOSSUP) Give the dative singular of the phrase “trepidus rex”.
ANS: Trepido regi
B1) Make “trepido regi” plural.
ANS: Trepidis regibus
B2) Make “trepidis regibus” accusative.
ANS: Trepidos reges
19. TOSSUP) What giant had viper coils for feet, flashed fire from his eyes, and was
so tall that he touched the stars?
ANS: Typhon/Typhoeus
B1) Who was the mother of Typhon?
ANS: Gaia/Terra
B2) Who finally defeated Typhon by hurling Mount Etna on top of him?
ANS: Zeus/Jupiter (if previous answer was Terra, Jupiter must be given; if
previous answer was Gaia; Zeus must be given)
20. TOSSUP) What do all of the following have in common? Viminal, Caelian,
Capitoline, Esquiline, Palatine.
ANS: They are all hills of Rome.
B1) Name one of the two remaining seven hills of Rome.
ANS: Aventine, Quirinal
B2) On what hill was Rome founded?
ANS: Palatine

LANGUAGE EXTRA ONE: How many tenses of verbs are there in Latin? ANSWER:
Six
BONUS: How many declensions of nouns are there in Latin? ANSWER: Five
BONUS: How many declensions of adjectives are there in Latin? ANSWER:
Three
LANGUAGE EXTRA TWO: Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Marcus, do
not help Julia.” ANSWER: Marce, noli iuvare Juliam.
BONUS ONE: Say in Latin, “Boys, do not help Julia.” ANSWER: Pueri, nolite
iuvare Juliam.
BONUS: Say in Latin, “Boys, help Julia.” ANSWER: Pueri, iuvate Juliam.
MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: What Titan defied Zeus by stealing fire and giving it to
mankind?
ANSWER: Prometheus
BONUS ONE: To punish Prometheus, Zeus chained him to a mountain and had a
certain kind of animal pluck at his liver. What was this animal? ANSWER: Eagle or
vulture
BONUS TWO: What woman did Zeus create to punish mankind? ANSWER:
Pandora
HISTORY EXTRA: We all know that Rome fell in 476 AD, but in what year did the
Eastern Roman Empire fall? ANSWER: 1453 AD
a. BONUS: In what year did Augustus die? ANSWER: 27 AD
b. BONUS: In what year was Julius Caesar assassinated? ANSWER: 44 BC

Harvard Certamen
Novice Round 3
TOSS-UP 1: The Harvard Classical Club hopes you are enjoying the tournament so far. The
Club also hopes you are enjoying your visit to Harvard's campus today, and that you can get to
know Harvard a little bit better during your time here. There is a lot to learn, because Harvard
has been around for a long time. In fact, it was founded in the year 1636, only 16 years after the
pilgrims landed at Plymouth. For your toss-up, give the Latin word for 16. SEDECIM
Bonus: Accordingly, Harvard is now 374 years old. Express 374 in Roman numerals.
CCCLXXIV
Bonus: Express 1636 in Roman numerals. MDCXXXVI
TOSS-UP 2: Translate into English Harvard's Latin motto, Veritas. TRUTH
Bonus: Change Veritas to the dative singular. VERITATI
Bonus: Give the Latin ablative plural of the phrase "great truths." VERITATIBUS
MAGNIS
TOSS-UP 3: The most imposing building in Harvard Yard is Widener Library, the centerpiece
of the largest university library system in the world. Widener houses 57 miles of bookshelves,
12 stacked levels, and approximately 3 million volumes including a Gutenburg Bible. It's easy to
get lost inside, and there are only a couple of doors into and out of the stacks. What
mythological character would you be imitating if you were to unwind a thread as you made your
way into the stacks so that you would be able find your way back out? THESEUS /
DAEDALUS
Bonus: Widener Library was funded with a donation in honor of Harry Elkins Widener,
a young Harvard graduate and book collector, who died during the sinking of the Titanic. What
did Theseus try to find when he took a swim in the Mediterranean in order to prove his parentage
to Minos? a signet RING
Bonus: According to legend, one of the stipulations of the Widener donation was that no
bricks of the structure would ever be moved. When renovations were needed after time, Harvard
complied by building a connecting bridge to another library through one of Widener's windows,
and creating reading rooms in what were formerly interior open-air atriums. What villain
encountered by Theseus was also particularly good at “stretching” the available resources to
make things fit. PROCRUSTES / DAMASTES / POLYPEMON
TOSS-UP 4: Right outside the Harvard Yard is the Science Center. From what Latin verb is
Science derived? SCIO

Bonus: In the middle of the Yard is the John Harvard Statue, sculpted in 1880 by Daniel
Chester French, whose other projects have included the Lincoln Memorial. From what Latin
verb is statue derived? STO
Bonus: Immediately behind the John Harvard Statue is University Hall, designed in 1815
by Charles Bulfinch, who was also the first architect of the U.S. Capitol. From what Latin verb
does English derive university? VERTO
TOSS-UP 5: When you think Harvard, think sports. The college offers 41 Division 1 sports,
more than any other institution in the country, and has collected 138 NCAA national
championships despite not offering athletic scholarships. The Harvard track team would love to
recruit what swift-footed maiden from mythology, the wife of Hippomenes? ATALANTA
Bonus: Harvard also has 28 club sports. Which member of the argonauts, a member of
the Dioscuri, would be most qualified to join Harvard's boxing club? POLYDEUCES /
POLLUX
Bonus: What mythological hero would be a great addition to Harvard's ultimate frisbee
team if he weren't so upset about killing his grandfather Acrisius with an errant discus throw?
PERSEUS
TOSS-UP 7: When you read an entry in the Oxford Classical Dictionary that concludes with the
signing initials E.B., it was written by Ernst Badian, professor emeritus from the history
department here at Harvard. His office was right next door in Robinson Hall. Name the
historical figure whom Professor Badian describes in the following lines from the Oxford
Classical Dictionary: This person served in the military “under his cousin Publius Cornelius
Scipio Aemilianus, who married his sister. As quaestor in Spain, he used his father's connections
to save the army of Gaius Hostilius Mancinus by a treaty later disowned by the senate on Scipio's
motion... As tribune of 133, in Scipio's absence, he proposed ... a law designed to solve Rome's
interlocking probems...”. TIBERIUS sempronius GRACCHUS
Bonus: Fill in the blank from this nearby entry by Professor Badian: “BLANK had more
ambitious plans than his brother, whose memory he revered. He saw the need for major
administrative reforms.” GAIUS sempronius GRACCHUS
Bonus: What historical figure is Professor Badian describing this time? "He was
assigned Africa by special legislation, and after restoring discipline and closing off the enemy's
harbour, he overcame long and desperate resistance and early in 146 captured Carthage after
days of street fighting.” Publius Cornelius SCIPIO AEMILIANUS Africanus Numantinus
TOSS-UP 8: The Harvard Law school offers a semester-long course devoted entirely to Roman
Law. Previous final exams have consisted in part of identifying the legal actions that could be
brought following a series of negligent mishaps that occur in the ancient Roman forum. What
particularly archaic body of Roman law, which is discussed early in the semester, was written by
the decemviri and posted in the Roman forum? The law of the TWELVE TABLES

Bonus: Later on in the Roman law class, students discuss the role of judges who framed
legal causes of action for litigants. What one-word title generally describes an official who had
this judicial role? PRAETOR
Bonus: Later still, students learn about the role of jurists who served under emperors
during the empire. One of the most famous of these jurists was Papinian. The emperor whom
Papinian served died just one year before Papinian's own death in 212 AD. Name the emperor.
SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS
TOSS-UP 9: Every year Harvard and Yale look forward to the grand showdown of their bitter
rivalry, known simply as “The Game.” I will describe for you a play from a Harvard-Yale
football game in which Harvard once again vanquishes the Elis of New Haven, and you will tell
me which battle of the Punic Wars it most resembles. Listen carefully. Yale's offense rushes
into Harvard's front line, convinced of their superior strength and emboldened by the home field
advantage. Harvard's defensive tackles give ground and let Yale push forward into the middle,
but its defensive ends and linebackers charge around Yale's unprotected flank to encircle them
from the rear for a huge sack. It's a career-ending play for one of Yale's two captains; the other
manages to limp to the sideline. Go Crimson! CANNAE
Bonus: Which Roman general died during the battle? Lucius Aemilius PAULLUS
Bonus: What was the year of the battle of Cannae? 216 BC
TOSS-UP 10: Not everyone can finish at Harvard. Bill Gates dropped out to pursue what he
considered better things. Which of these software programs now sold by Mr. Gates' company is
not derived from a Latin root: PowerPoint, Word, Excel, Access. WORD
Bonus: Another more recent Harvard drop-out, Mark Zuckerberg, created a popular
social network service the Romans might have called liber vultuum, but which we call Facebook.
Give the Latin word and its meaning from which social is derived. SOCIUS,
FRIEND/ALLY/COMRADE, etc.
Bonus: Actor Matt Damon also attended Harvard but moved onto bigger and better
things before graduating. Of the three films in the Jason Bourne series — the Bourne Identity,
the Bourne Supremacy and the Bourne Ultimatum — which does not contain a derivative of a
Latin superlative? Bourne IDENTITY
TOSS-UP 11: What street on the outskirts of Harvard Yard shares its name with a road that led
from Rome to Capua and later Brundisium, and from part of whose Latin name we derive the
English words deviate and obvious? You can give the English or Latin name. VIA APPIA /
APPIAN WAY
Bonus: Mount Auburn Street leads from Harvard Square to the Mount Auburn Cemetery
and beyond. From what word denoting a color is auburn derived? ALBUS

Bonus: Massachusetts Avenue, which curls around Harvard Yard, leads all the way
across the state. From what Latin verb is Avenue derived? VENIO
TOSS-UP 12: A popular course for many years here has been the Concept of the Hero in Greek
Civilization, taught by Professor Nagy. One of the chief subjects of the course is a participant of
the Trojan War who was destined to live a long life without glory, or a short one that people
would remember for ages. His wrath is the subject of the Iliad. Name him. ACHILLES
Bonus: In the Heroes course, one learns about micronarratives, compressed tales of
epics that are inserted within other epics. As part of a micronarrative, Achilles is told the story
of what son of Oeneus and Althaea who led the Calydonian board hunt? MELEAGER
Bonus: In the Heroes course, one also learns about ecphrasis, the description of a work
of art that itself tells a micronarrative within a larger literary work. Achilles receives a new
shield, from which Homer creates an ecphrasis, after what companion loses Achilles' usual
armor? PATROCLUS
TOSS-UP 13: This is a visual question. I will pass out the visuals face down. Do not turn them
over until instructed…. Now that everyone has a copy of the visual, please turn them over and
take 10 seconds to review…. Erich Segal, a notable Harvard alumnus, passed away in February.
Segal was an admired scholar of the classics, but much more famous for his popular works of
literature, which included the Harvard-inspired novel and screenplay, Love Story. Segal was
also the Latin Salutatorian for the class of 1958, and delivered the Latin salutatory at
commencement in that year right outside this building. This visual contains some excerpts from
his Latin Salutatory and his translation of it into English. Excerpt A salutes President Nathan
Pusey, who wore a purple academic robe. What is the case of purpurate? VOCATIVE
Bonus: Excerpt B praises Harvard's professors. What is the case of vobis? ABLATIVE
Bonus: Excerpt D salutes the alumni. What is the tense of dedistis? PERFECT
TOSS-UP 14: John Quincy Adams was required to pass an entrance exam in Latin and Greek to
begin at Harvard in 1786. For one of his questions, he was then asked to translate a passage of
contemporary English into Latin on the spot. The passage began: “There cannot certainly be a
higher ridicule than to give an air of importance to amusements.” Adams translated that part as
follows: “Nihil profecto risu dignior quam magni aestimare delectamenta.” For your question,
what type of verb form is aestimare? present active INFINITIVE
Bonus: Of what Latin verb is risu a form? RIDEO, ridere, risi, risum
Bonus: If dignus means worthy, what does dignior mean? MORE/RATHER WORTHY
TOSS-UP 15: What graduate of the Harvard Law School has a name which can be translated as
“I shall love” if it is read backwards? Barack OBAMA

Bonus: Translate the Latin word “aestates” and you will also provide the name of a
former Harvard President. Larry SUMMERS (i.e. the current treasury secretary)
Bonus: Harvard Law Professor Larry Tribe enjoyed watching one of his former students,
Chief Justice John Roberts, swear in another former student, Barack Obama, at the presidential
inauguration last year. Give a Latin word for Tribe. GENS / NATIO / TRIBUS
TOSS-UP 16: There is a long historic rivalry between the Harvard Crimson newspaper and the
Harvard Lampoon humor publication. In 1953, the Crimson editors pranked the Lampoon by
stealing the large copper Ibis perched atop Lampoon headquarters and presenting it as a gift to a
Soviet ambassador on behalf of the students of America, all at the height of the Cold War. The
Crimson editors must have felt much like two Greek heroes who snuck into Troy to steal a
sacred statue that would be needed for Greek victory. Name either of these Greek heroes, one
the son of Tydeus and the other the son of Laertes. ODYSSEUS or DIOMEDES (if they buzz in
early and give two names, but one is wrong, do not accept; if they give both correct, then accept)
Bonus: According to Lampoon legend, the best prank of 1933 was purloining the sacred
cod, a nearly five-foot statue of a fish that hangs prominently in the chamber of the
Massachusetts House of Representatives. It was quietly returned. What was the name of the
sacred statue that Odysseus and Diomedes stole from Troy? PALLADIUM
Bonus: The Lampoon has pulled a few pranks of its own. According to legend,
Lampoon president Conan O'Brien led a group of students pretending to be construction workers
to jackhammer a sidewalk in Boston. He called the Boston police to complain that students were
posing as construction workers to destroy the sidewalk. Then he called the state police to
complain that students were posing as Boston police to obstruct his construction crew. Hilarity
ensued, and somehow he didn't suffer expulsion. What Greek deity helped disguise Odysseus
upon his return to Ithaca to keep his identity secret? ATHENA
TOSS-UP 17: The oldest building in the Yard is Massachusetts Hall, built in 1720. When
George Washington first took command of the Continental Army, it was at the Cambridge
Common just past Massachusetts Hall, and the building itself sheltered soldiers of his army.
What Roman figure was similarly called from the plow of his farm to respond to a military crisis
during the 5th Century BC? Lucius Quinctius CINCINNATUS
Bonus: Washington ultimately delivered the city of Boston from the British by securing
Dorchester heights south of the city, and perching his cannons from its hilltops to force the
British evacuation. What mountain featured prominently in the crisis averted by Cincinnatus?
mount ALGIDUS
Bonus: The name George is connected to agriculture, from the Greek words for earth and
work, in a tradition including Vergil's Georgics. What did the name Cincinnatus mean?
CURLY-haired
TOSS-UP 18: Some of the best pizza and subs you will ever find is at Pinocchio's, a small
restaurant in Harvard Square. While you wait for a Sicilian slice with pepperoni, be sure to

study the map of Rome in the age of Constantine hanging on Pinocchio's wall. The pepperoni
slices on your pizza will be round just like what large structure near the arch of Constantine and
the meta sudans, where Romans poured in and out of 80 entrances to see naumachiae, bestiarii,
secutors, myrmidons and lots of gladiatorial shows. the COLOSSEUM / FLAVIAN
AMPHITHEATER
Bonus: The Sicilian slice will itself be square or rectangular, much like the Senate House
you can see in the Roman Forum. What was that called? CURIA
Bonus: If you're really hungry, order a cheeseburger sub on the side. What long chariotracing track on the map -- the greatest of them all -- will resemble the shape of your
cheeseburger sub? CIRCUS MAXIMUS
TOSS-UP 20: Not to be left out of the fun of the Harvard-Yale football game, at least
when it is played in Cambridge, is nearby MIT. MIT has often interrupted the festivities with a
prank. In 1982, a weather balloon with the letters MIT emerged from midfield during The
Game. Say in Latin "from the field.” EX CAMPO / A CAMPO / EX AGRO / AB AGRO
Bonus 1: At the Harvard-Yale football game, one of the most popular chants to mock the
Yale fans might be translated into Latin at "ludus salutatis". Translate that into English.
SAFETY SCHOOL, SCHOOL OF SAFETY, GAME OF SAFETY, etc.
Bonus 2: Wide receiver and future senator Ted Kennedy once caught a touchdown pass
in the Harvard-Yale game. From what Latin verb is wide receiver derived? CAPIO

HARVARD CERTAMEN - ROUND 3 VISUAL, ALL LEVELS
Excerpts from Latin Salutatory of Erich Segal, ’58
A.
Tu primum praeses, purpurate Pusei, aster altissime. Te sequimur O delictum decus academiae cuius
rebus gestis nunc videmus, “Quantum religio possit suadere ... donorum!
(TRANSLATION): You first of all O purpled Pusey, starry summit, we follow your lead, the chosen glory
of academia. We see indeed your achievements prove the maxim, “God's influence gains affluence.”
************************************************************************************

B.
Carissimi ac doctissimi professores, sine vobis, vita enim una perpetua dormienda esset nox.
(TRANSLATION): Esteemed and learned professors, without your influence, life would be an
interminable sleepy night.
************************************************************************************

C.
Nec vos omittamus, puellae pulcherrimae Radcliffianae, quas socias studemus vivendi, ridendi, bibendi...
Musae nostrae, numquam maiora canamus
(TRANSLATION): Nor shall we overlook you, beautiful Radcliff demoiselles whom earnestly we seek as
companions for living, laughing and quaffing.... O our Muses, never can we sing a loftier theme.
************************************************************************************

D.
Donatores - (identidem donaturi ut speramus) vobis palma parata quod palmas nostras complestis. “O
fons Pecuniae splendidior vitro, nobis lucem -per- lucrum dedistis!”
(TRANSLATION): O generous bestowers of gifts (who'll give again and again, we hope!) “the palm is
yours,” for you've filled our palms. “O fount of funds more splendid than crystal,” you have given us
light-through-lucre!

Harvard Certamen 2010
Novice Semifinals
1. TOSSUP) What son of Iapetus and Clymene did Heracles enlist to help acquire
the golden apples of the Hesperides?
ANS: Atlas
B1) What son of Iapetus and Clymene foolishly accepted Pandora as a gift from
Zeus, bringing a host of ills upon mankind?
ANS: Epimetheus
B2) Which brother of Epimetheus did Zeus hurl down to Hades?
ANS: Menoetes
2. TOSSUP) Listen carefully to the following passage, which I will read twice, then
answer in LATIN the question that follows: Tres filii et pulcherrima uxor erat
Marco, qui vetus agricola erat. Sed Marcus non equum habebat, quamquam
equum volebat habere. Idcirco iter fecit Marcus ad forum ut equum
inveniret. The question: Qualis erat uxor Marci?
ANSWER: Pulcherrima
B1) Quod animal Marco defuit?
ANS: Equus
B2) Quare iter fecit Marcus ad forum?
ANS: Ut equum inveniret
3. TOSSUP) Give the genitive singular of the phrase “ille homo magnus”.
ANS: illius hominis magni
B1) Make “illius hominis magni” dative plural.
ANS: illis hominibus magnis
B2) Make “illis hominibus magnis” accusative singular
ANS: illum hominem magnum.
4. TOSSUP) Which emperor fought against the Alemmani, has a column which
bears his name, and wrote a philosophical treatise called the “Meditations”?
ANS: Marcus Aurelius
B1) What was the name of his son, who as emperor failed to live up to his father’s
legacy?
ANS: Commodus (Lucius Aurelius Commodus Antoninus)
B2) Commodus died in 192 AD. How many emperors were there in 193 AD?
ANS: Five
5. TOSSUP) In the sentence “Claudius spoke on behalf of Marcus,” translate “on
behalf of Marcus” into Latin using a prepositional phrase.
ANS: Pro Marco
B1) In the sentence “We like to sit beneath the bridge,” translate “beneath the
bridge” into Latin.
ANS: Sub ponte

B2) In the sentence “There is a lot of trash around the river,” translate “around the
river” into Latin.
ANS: Circum flumen
6. TOSSUP) What type of Roman marriage involved a fictitious “sale” of the bride
to the groom?
ANS: Coemptio
B1) What type of common law Roman marriage involved the bride leaving her
husband for a specified amount of time each year?
ANS: Manus
B2) What was the oldest, patrician form of marriage?
ANS: Confarreatio
7. TOSSUP) According to Hesiod’s Theogony, Gaia, Eros, Erebus and Nyx all arose
from a primordial cosmic substance. What was the name of this formless dark
void, which comes directly into English as a word denoting “a state of extreme
disorder and confusion?”
ANS: Chaos
B1) In Homeric epic, nectar is the drink of the gods and another substance is their
food. What is the name of this substance, which comes directly into English as a
word denoting “something which is extremely pleasant to taste or smell”?
ANS: Ambrosia
B2) According to Hesiod, what child of Erebus and Nyx was the goddess of
divine retribution and merciless justice? Her name comes directly into English as
a word meaning “an opponent or rival whom a person cannot overcome.”
ANS: Nemesis
8. TOSSUP) Quid Anglice significat “negotium”?
ANS: Business, pain, trouble, annoyance
B1) Quid Anglice significat “libido”?
ANS: Pleasure, desire, lust, longing
B2) Quid Anglice significat “ripa”?
ANS: Bank (of a river)
9. TOSSUP) Complete the following grammatical analogy: rapio is to rapti sumus
as fero is to _____________.
ANS: Lati sumus
B1) Make lati sumus pluperfect.
ANS: lati eramus
B2) Make lati eramus future perfect
ANS: lati erimus

10. TOSSUP) What insane emperor toured Greece because he thought he was a gifted
artist, and eventually had his mother Agrippina assassinated?
ANS: Nero
B1) What insane emperor made his horse a senator?
ANS: Caligula
B2) What was the name of this unusually distinguished horse?
ANS: Incitatus
11. TOSSUP) Of the nouns scutum, gaudium, hiems and lux, which is being
described here? Utuntur hoc instrumento pugnantes in proelio, ne ab gladiis
vulnerentur
ANS: Scutum
B1) Which of them is being described here?: fugat tenebras et mittitur ab sole.
ANS: Lux
B2) Which of them is being described here?: multam nivem semper dat terris.
ANS: Hiems
12. TOSSUP) What Ethiopian maiden bore Gorgophone and Perses to the hero
Perseus after he saved her from a sea monster?
ANS: Andromeda
B1) What was the name of Andromeda’s uncle, to whom she ha been promised as
a wife?
ANS: Phineus
B2) What later hero was the great grandson of Perseus and Andromeda?
ANS: Heracles/Hercules
13. TOSSUP) Baecula, Trebia, Lake Trasimene, the Metaurus River, Cannae and
Zama were all battles in what war?
ANS: The Second Punic War
B1) In which of those battles did Livius Salinator defeat Hannibal’s brother
Hasdrubal?
ANS: Metaurus River
B2) In which of those battles, fought in 217 BC, did Hannibal ambush and
slaughter the troops of Gaius Flaminius?
ANS: Lake Trasimene
14. TOSSUP) What literary device is found in the following line from Vergil? “Illi
indignantes magno cum murmure montis circum claustra fremunt”.
ANS: Alliteration or Onomatopoeia
B1) What figure of speech is found in the following line? “Omnes multam
Cerem laeti consumpserunt.”
ANS: Metonymy
B2) What figure of speech is found in the following line? “Moriamur et media
in arma ruamus.”
ANS: Hysteron Proteron

15. TOSSUP) Who am I? As a baby, I was suckled by the she-goat Amaltheia and my
cries were concealed by a group of Curetes constantly banging their shields. I
convinced my consort Metis to give my father Cronus an emetic, forcing him to
disgorge my siblings.
ANS: Zeus/Jupiter
B1) Cronus had also overthrown his father. What was the name of this father, who
was married to Gaia?
ANS: Ouranos/Uranus
B2) How did Gaia assist Cronus in overthrowing his father?
ANS: She gave him a sickle.
16. TOSSUP) Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Augusto et Antonio
pugnantibus, omnes timebamus.”
ANS: While/since Augustus and Antony were fighting, we were all afraid.
B1) Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Mihi optimus semper fuisti,
Caesare.”
ANS: You have always been very good to me, Caesar.
B2) Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Nonne Caesar consul creatus
est ab populo?”
ANS: Wasn’t Caesar elected/made consul by the people?
17. TOSSUP) What Latin phrase refers to a legal writ requiring a prisoner to be
brought before a judge, and literally means “you may have the body”?
ANS: Habeas corpus
B1) In Catholic theology, what Latin phrase literally meaning “from the chair”
refers to an infallible pronouncement of the pope?
ANS: Ex cathedra
B2) What phrase of legal Latin literally means “a body of civil law”?
ANS: Corpus juris civilis
18. TOSSUP) In Homer’s Odyssey, what cannibal race consumes all but one of
Odysseus’ ships?
ANS: The Laestrygonians
B1) Who is the Laestrygonians’ king?
ANS: Antiphates
B2) How many ships does Odysseus escape from the Laestrygonians with?
ANS: One
19. TOSSUP) From what Latin noun with what meaning do we derive “salutatorian,”
“salutary” and “salubrious”?
ANS: Salus (“health, safety, welfare”)
B1) From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive “dissent”?
ANS: Sentio (“feel”)
B2) From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive “insect”?
ANS: Seco (“to cut”)

20. TOSSUP) According to tradition, what Roman king incorporated the Janiculum
hill into the city, founded the sea port of Ostia, and built the Pons Sublicius?
ANS: Ancus Marcius
B1) Who was Ancus Marcius’ grandfather?
ANS: Numa Pompilius
B2) What later king of Rome was killed by Ancus Marcius’ sons?
ANS: (Lucius) Tarquinius Priscus

Harvard Certamen 2010
Novice Finals
1. TOSSUP) For the verb paro, parare, give the genitive plural of the present active
participle.
ANS: Parantium
B1) Make parantium dative.
ANS: Parantibus
B2) Make parantibus nominative singular.
ANS: Parans
2. TOSSUP) Who am I? I lived in Alexandria. My family was called the Ptolemies. I
was the seventh queen with my name. They say I killed myself with the bite of an
asp. I gave birth to one son by Julius Caesar, and three children by Marc Antony.
ANS: Cleopatra
B1) Who am I? My name means “chickpea.” Fulvia stabbed my tongue after I
died for saying mean things about her husband.
ANS: (Marcus Tullius) Cicero
B2) Who am I? I was a great general, and so were my father, uncle, and brother,
as well as my adopted grandchild. I fought in Spain and North Africa and took
New Carthage from the Carthaginians.
ANS: (Publius Cornelius) Scipio Africanus
3. TOSSUP) Translate the following sentence into English: “Claudi, filia tua
semper tibi amanda est.”
ANS: Claudius, you must always love your daughter.
B1) Translate this into English: “Scio nunc nos omnes morituros esse.”
ANS: I know now that we will all die.
B2) Translate this into English: “Non sum qui amicos habeam.”
ANS: I am not he who has friends (I am not the sort of man who has
friends).
4. TOSSUP) What fisherman from Anthedon fell in love with Scylla?
ANS: Glaucus
B1) Unfortunately for the pair, what witch was in love with Glaucus?
ANS: Circe
B2) What monster did Circe transform Scylla into?
ANS: 6-headed dog
5. TOSSUP) For the verb volo, give the 2nd person plural present active indicative.
ANS: Vultis
B1) Change mavultis to the future perfect.
ANS: Volueritis
B2) Change malueritis to the imperfect.
ANS: Volebatis

6. TOSSUP) What do the following have in common? Apodyterium, Laconicum,
Caldarium, Tepidarium.
ANS: They were all rooms in a Roman bathhouse.
B1) Which room was the hot room?
ANS: Caldarium
B2) Which room was the changing room?
ANS: Apodyterium
7. TOSSUP) Listen to the following passage, which I will read twice. Then answer
in LATIN the question that follows. The passage: “Augustus optimus dux
iudicatus est ab multis Romanis, sed non ab Marco. Nam Marcus putabat
Augustum trucem esse.” The question: Quibus erat Augustus optimus dux?
ANS: Multis Romanis.
B1) Qualem putabat Marcus Augustum?
ANS: Trucem
B2) Quid Anglice significat “trux”?
ANS: Savage, wild, fierce
8. TOSSUP) What famous king had to wash his hands in the river Pactolus to cure
them of his golden touch?
ANS: Midas
B1) Midas once judged a musical competition between Apollo and a smaller god.
Who was this smaller god, whom Midas judged the superior musician?
ANS: Pan
B2) What river deity, the other judge of Apollo and Pan’s contest, thought Apollo
was the superior musician?
ANS: Tmolus
9. TOSSUP) Say iin Latin: “It is difficult to trust senators.”
ANS: Credere senatoribus difficile est
B1) Using a comparative adjective, say in Latin, “It is very difficult to trust
senators.”
ANS: Credere senatoribus difficilime est
B2) Using the verb debeo, say in Latin, “We must answer wisely.”
ANS: Sapienter respondere debemus
10. TOSSUP) From what Latin verb do we derive the English noun “crusade”?
ANS: Crux
B1) From what Latin verb do we derive the English noun “corridor”?
ANS: Curro
B2) From what Latin verb does the English adjective “exigent” derive?
ANS: Ago

11. TOSSUP) What consular colleague of Julius Caesar was so weak and ineffectual
that many Romans called the year “the consulship of Julius and Caesar”?
ANS: (Marcus) Bibulus
B1) In what year did Julius Caesar and this snivelling twit serve as consuls?
ANS: 59 BC
B2) After Bibulus’ opponents broke his fasces and dumped feces on his head,
how did he respond?
ANS: He retired from public life / withdrew into his house.
12. TOSSUP) During the 1st Punic War, what Spartan mercenary saved Carthage
from a Roman invasion?
ANS: Xanthippus
B1) What Roman general did Xanthippus defeat to do this?
ANS: (Marcus Atilius) Regulus
B2) During the 1st Punic War, what Carthaginian admiral beached Claudius
Pulcher’s fleet at Drepana?
ANS: Adherbal
13. TOSSUP) What use of the ablative case is found in the following sentence?
“Certe fruimur fructis edendis.”
ANS: Ablative with special (deponent) verbs OR Ablative of means
B1) Name one deponent verb other than fruor that takes an ablative object.
ANS: Potior, vescor, utor, fungor
B2) In “certe fruimur fructis edendis,” what type of adjective is edendis?
ANS: Gerundive
14. TOSSUP) What king of Trachis drowned in a storm and was transformed into a
kingfisher?
ANS: Ceyx
B1) Who was the wife of Ceyx who was similarly transformed by the gods
because her grief was so great?
ANS: Alcyone
B2) Many couples in mythology underwent transformations. Into what were
Baucis and Philemon transformed?
ANS: linden and oak
15. TOSSUP) Quid Anglice significat “testis”?
ANS: Witness
B1) Quid Anglice significat “testamentum”?
ANS: Will, testament, covenant
B2) Quid Anglice significat “testudo”?
ANS: Tortoise, movable shield
16. TOSSUP) In Ovid’s Metamorphoses, what deity impersonates an old woman in
order to woo Pomona?
ANS: Vertumnus

B1) In the Metamorphoses, what young man swims across the Hellespont every
night to see his beloved sweetheart Hero?
ANS: Leander
B2) In the Metamorphoses, what Babylonian lovers are separated by a wall?
ANS: Pyramus and Thisbe
17. TOSSUP) What is the meaning of the Latin idiom “bellum gerere”?
ANS: To wage war
B1) What is the meaning of the idiom “castra movere”?
ANS: To break camp
B2) What is meaning of the idiom “tergum dare”?
ANS: To retreat
18. TOSSUP) Along with his sons, what Trojan priest was killed by snakes sent from
the sea after he warned his countrymen about the Trojan horse?
ANS: Laocoon
B1) What deceptive Greek convinced the Trojans that the horse was a votive
offering to the Gods?
ANS: Sinon
B2) What daughter of Priam also warned the Greeks against accepting the horse,
but was ignored?
ANS: Cassandra
19. TOSSUP) Which of the following words does NOT derive from the same Latin
root as the others? Consist, statutory, stipulate, station.
ANS: Stipulate
B1) Which of the following words does NOT derive from Latin at all? Rheostat,
salt, sally, salient.
ANS: Rheostat, salt, sally, salient
B2) From what Latin word with what meaning does “salient” derive?
ANS: Salio (“leap, jump”)
20. TOSSUP) What famous law passed in 67 BC gave Pompey command over the
Mediterranean in order to fight piracy?
ANS: The Lex Gabinia
B1) What law, passed a year later, gave him command against Mithridates?
ANS: The Lex Manilia
B2) What was the name of Cicero’s speech arguing in favor of this law?
ANS: Pro Lege Manilia

Harvard Certamen - Novice Extra Questions
Round One
LANGUAGE EXTRA ONE: Translate the relative pronoun in the following sentence: I
loved the man who deceived us all. ANSWER: Qui
BONUS ONE: Translate the relative pronoun in the following sentence: The dogs
which I trusted ate my sister. ANSWER: Quibus
BONUS TWO: Translate the relative pronoun in the following sentence: The
name which you have is silly. ANSWER: Quid
LANGUAGE EXTRA TWO: What use of the ablative appears in the following sentence:
Run home with the greatest speed! ANSWER: Manner
BONUS ONE: Translate the sentence from the toss-up into Latin. ANSWER:
Curre domum cum maxime celeritate.
BONUS TWO: Maximus is the superlative form of magnus. What is the positive
adverbial form of that word? ANSWER: Magnopere
MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: Whose blood stains the mulberry tree? ANSWER: Pyramus
BONUS ONE: Who wrote a play based on this tale of star-cross’d lovers?
ANSWER: William Shakespeare
BONUS TWO: In what modern-day country was this myth set? ANSWER: Iraq
HISTORY EXTRA: Complete the following analogy: Paullus : Cannae :: Crassus :
_________. ANSWER: Carrhae
BONUS ONE: Who was the other Roman general at the battle of Cannae?
ANSWER: Varro
BONUS TWO: According to Dante, how was Crassus executed? ANSWER: (the
Parthians) poured molten gold down his throat
Round Two
LANGUAGE EXTRA ONE: How many tenses of verbs are there in Latin? ANSWER:
Six
BONUS ONE: How many declensions of nouns are there in Latin? ANSWER:
Five
BONUS TWO: How many declensions of adjectives are there in Latin?
ANSWER: Three
LANGUAGE EXTRA TWO: Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Marcus, do
not help Julia.” ANSWER: Marce, noli iuvare Juliam.
BONUS ONE: Say in Latin, “Boys, do not help Julia.” ANSWER: Pueri, nolite
iuvare Juliam.
BONUS TWO: Say in Latin, “Boys, help Julia.” ANSWER: Pueri, iuvate Juliam.

MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: What Titan defied Zeus by stealing fire and giving it to
mankind?
ANSWER: Prometheus
BONUS ONE: To punish Prometheus, Zeus chained him to a mountain and had a
certain kind of animal pluck at his liver. What was this animal? ANSWER: Eagle or
vulture
BONUS TWO: What woman did Zeus create to punish mankind? ANSWER:
Pandora
HISTORY EXTRA: We all know that Rome fell in 476 AD, but in what year did the
Eastern Roman Empire fall? ANSWER: 1453 AD
BONUS ONE: In what year did Augustus die? ANSWER: 27 AD
BONUS TWO: In what year was Julius Caesar assassinated? ANSWER: 44 BC
Semifinals
LANGUAGE EXTRA ONE: For the verb maneo, manēre, give the third person, plural,
pluperfect, active, indicative. ANSWER: manserant
BONUS ONE: For the verb eo, ire, give the second person, singular, future
perfect, active, indicative. ANSWER: iveris
BONUS TWO: For the verb amo, amare, give the first person, plural, present,
passive, indicative. ANSWER: amamur
LANGUAGE EXTRA TWO: Distinguish in meaning between volo, volare and volo,
velle. ANSWER: volo, volare: to fly, volo, velle: to want/wish
BONUS ONE: Distinguish in meaning among moneo, munio, and maneo.
ANSWER: moneo: to warn, munio: to fortify/build, maneo: to remain/stay
BONUS TWO: Distinguish in meaning among tamen, tantum, and tandem.
ANSWER: tamen: nevertheless, tantum: so great, tandem: finally
MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: Which mortal consort of Venus did Jupiter strike with a
lightning bolt? ANSWER: Anchises
BONUS ONE: As whom did Cupid disguise himself to make Dido fall in love
with Aeneas? ANSWER: Ascanius/Iulus
BONUS TWO: What city did Ascanius later found? ANSWER: Alba Longa
HISTORY EXTRA: Name in chronological order the emperors of 69 AD. ANSWER:
Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian
BONUS ONE: What dynasty did Vespasian found? ANSWER: Flavian
BONUS TWO: Who sacked Jerusalem in 70 AD, providing Vespasian with the
funds to build the Colosseum? ANSWER: Titus

Finals
LANGUAGE EXTRA ONE: Words like “audeo,” “gaudeo,” and “soleo” belong to what
verb family? ANSWER: semi-deponents
BONUS ONE: Words like “odi,” “coepi,” and “memini” belong to what verb
family? ANSWER: defective
BONUS TWO: Words like “domus,” which have case endings belonging to more
than one declension, are referred to as what? ANSWER: heteroclite
LANGUAGE EXTRA TWO: Quid Anglice significat “nux”? ANSWER: nut
BONUS ONE: Quid Anglice significat “radix”? ANSWER: root
BONUS TWO: Quid Anglice significat “ovum”? ANSWER: sheep
MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: Who was the mother of the cyclops Polyphemus? ANSWER:
Thoosa
BONUS ONE: Which nymph did Polyphemus attempt to woo in Ovid’s
Metamorphoses by saying that his hairiness makes him attractive? ANSWER: Galatea
BONUS TWO: What sailor from Odysseus’s crew was rescued by Aeneas from
Polyphemus’s island? ANSWER: Achaemenides
HISTORY EXTRA: What chieftain of the Suebi led an attack against the Caesar’s forces
in Gaul? ANSWER: Ariovistus
BONUS ONE: At what battle in 52 BC did the forces of Vercingetorix defeat the
forces of Caesar? ANSWER: Gergovia
BONUS TWO: Where did Caesar’s forces land on the western coast of Greece,
suffering a defeat at the hands of Pompey? ANSWER: Dyracchium

