Harvard Certamen 2010
Intermediate Round 1
1. TOSSUP) From what Latin noun with what meaning does the English verb
“deprecate” derive?
ANS: prex-prayer
B1) From what Latin noun with what meaning does the English noun “depreciate”
derive?
ANS: pretium-price
B2) What From what Latin verb with what meaning does the English verb
“depress” derive?
ANS: premo-to press
2. TOSSUP) Which river of the underworld do spirits drink from to forget their
memories?
ANS: Lethe
B1) Which river of the underworld, the river of hate, is most commonly said to
surround the underworld as a whole?
ANS: Styx
B2) Which river, if not the Styx, surrounds Tartarus and all the bad, bad people
that live there, and is known as the river of woe?
ANS: Acheron
3. TOSSUP) For the verb a
facere, give the second person, singular, perfect,
passive indicative.
ANS: factus –a -um es
B1) Change factus es to the imperfect tense.
ANS: ēb s
B2) Change fiebas to the active voice.
ANS: a ēb s
4. TOSSUP)
d
ēs
a “argentum”?
ANS: silver
B1) If aureus means golden and argenteus means “of silver,” what Latin
adjective means “of lead”?
ANS: plumbeus (-a,-um)
B2) The suffix – s s can also be used to transform nouns into adjectives. What
does this suffix mean?
ANS: full (of)
5. TOSSUP) What enemy did Odysseus overcome with wine and a sharp stick?
ANS: Polyphemus
B1) What enemy did Odysseus overcome with the herb Moly?
ANS: Circe
B2) What enemy did Odysseus overcome with the help of a bow, a swineherd, a
cow-herd, Athena, and his son?

ANS: The Suitors (of Penelope)
6. TOSSUP) Where did the Gallic Senones destroy the Roman army sent against
them on July 18th, 390 B.C?
ANS: The Allia River
B1) Who was the leader of the Senones?
ANS: Brennus
B2) This day was seen as unlucky and ill omened by the Romans for generations
after. What name was given to this day?
ANS: Dies Aliensis
7. TOSSUP) Translate the following sentence into English:
e a
as
esse pulchram.
ANS: “I think that the girl in the house is beautiful.”
B1) Translate: Cupio e
asa e d e e e ae
ANS: “I want to go into the house and talk to (speak with) the girl.”
B2) Translate: e ea
o
ē e a a esse
ANS: “I hope that she will not reject (refuse) me.”
8. TOSSUP) How many of the emperors of 69 A.D were stationed in Rome at the
time of Nero's death?
ANS: None
B1) From where did two of the emperors of 69A.D come to Rome?
ANS: Germania
B2) From which province did Vespasian come to Rome?
ANS: Judea
9. TOSSUP) From what Latin verb with what meaning does the English word
“insult” derive?
ANS: salio-to leap
B1) What English word, also derived from salio, means the effect or outcome of
some action?
ANS: result
B2) What other English word, derived from salio, means “to fry in a pan with a
little butter over high heat”?
ANS: sauté
10. TOSSUP) In a chariot race, each chariot could be pulled by as few as two or as
many as seven horses. What was the most common number of horses which one
would expect to see on a team in a chariot race?
ANS: Four
B1) Suppose you were racing in a chariot in the Circus Maximus, being pulled by
four horses. Which of the four horses in front of you was considered to be the
most strategically important?
ANS: The horse on the extreme left.

B2) What was the Latin honorary name given to a horse who figured in 100
victories during its career?
ANS: Centenarius
11. TOSSUP) Complete the following analogy:
s is to tergum as dexter is to
what?
ANS: sinister / laevus / infelix / infautus / inscitus / rusticus (do NOT
read other possible answers)
B1) Give two other antonyms of dexter.
ANS: SEE TOSS-UP.
B2) What French-corrupted derivative of dexter means “clumsy” or “awkward”?
ANS: maladroit
12. TOSSUP) What daughter of Zeus was kidnapped from Sicily by her uncle Hades
to be his wife?
ANS: Persephone (not Proserpina)
B1) Who was the mother of Persephone, who took the news of her abduction
rather poorly?
ANS: Demeter (not Ceres)
B2) Demeter turned two men into a lizard and an owl, respectively, during her
search for her daughter. Name either of them.
ANS: Ascalabus (lizard), Ascalaphus (owl)
13. TOSSUP) What foreign adventurer, who had once been king of Macedon, was
hired by the city of Tarentum to fight Rome?
ANS: Pyrrhus (of Epirus)
B1) What other king of Epirus,a brother in law of Alexander the Great, was also
hired by Tarentum in 334 B.C?
ANS: Alexander of Epirus
B2) Where was Pyrrhus finally defeated by Curius Dentatus in 275 B.C?
ANS: Beneventum (or Maleventum)
14. TOSSUP) Distinguish in meaning between herba and barba.
ANS: herba=grass, barba=beard
B1) Now distinguish in meaning between
s and propinquus.
ANS:
s=unjust, propinquus=nearby
B2) Now distinguish in meaning between the adjective tristis and the noun
tribus.
ANS: tristis=sad, tribus=tribe
15. TOSSUP) What general competed with the literary patron Maecenas for the favor
of emperor Augustus?
ANS: Agrippa
B1) What relative of Augustus did Agrippa marry?
ANS: Julia (prompt if “his daughter” is given)
B2) What object did Augustus give Agrippa when he thought he was dying?

ANS: His signet ring.
16. TOSSUP) What prophetess, also called Deiphobe, helps Aeneas gain access to the
underworld in the sixth book of Vergil’s Aeneid?
ANS: The Sibyl of Cumae
B1) While in the underworld, Aeneas unsuccessfully attempts to talk to his former
lover Dido. Without speaking a word to Aeneas, to whom does Dido leave him
for?
ANS: Sychaeus (prompt if “her husband” is given)
B2) Who in the underworld tells Aeneas about Marcellus, who will die at a young
age?
ANS: Anchises (prompt if “his father” is given)
17. TOSSUP) At what battle in 378 A.D. did the Gothic leader Fritigern annihilate a
Roman army?
ANS: Adrianople
B1) Which Eastern Roman emperor was killed during the battle?
ANS: Valens
B2) Who succeeded Valens as emperor in the East?
ANS: Theodosius I (The Great)
18. TOSSUP) When recognized by the spotter, perform the following command:
et manibus tuis claude oculos tuos.
ANS: The player should stand and close/cover their eyes with their hands.
B1) Now perform the following command: o e ē e b a
od
fluctuantis undae.
ANS: At least two team members must “do the wave” or move their arms in
a wavelike manner

B2) Now perform the following command: a ē e e sa d
s o o.
ANS: At least two team members should touch the table/desk with eight
fingers
19. TOSSUP) Whom did Milanion beat in a footrace by tossing golden apples?
ANS: Atalanta
B1) What would have happened to Milanion of he had lost the footrace
ANS: He would have been killed
B2) What son of Atalanta fought in the first expedition against Thebes?
ANS: Parthenopaeus
20. TOSSUP) Which of the following does derive from the same Latin word as the
others: contend, contiguous, contact, contaminate?
ANS: contend
B1) From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive contend?
ANS: tendo-to stretch
B2) From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive the other three words
in the tossup?
ANS: tango-to touch

Harvard Certamen 2010
Intermediate Round 2
1. TOSSUP) In three wars fought during the fourth and third centuries B.C., what
Italian enemies did Rome contend against?
ANS: The Samnites
B1) Which of the Samnite Wars was conducted from 326 to 304 BC?
ANS: Second Samnite War
B2) In what pivotal battle of 295 BC did Decius Mus effectively end the Third
Samnite War?
ANS: Sentinum
2. TOSSUP) Whenever a Roman citizen would write or inscribe his name, it was
customary for him to abbreviate his praenomen. Which praenomen was
commonly abbreviated by the letter “D”?
ANS: Decimus
B1) Which praenomen was commonly abbreviated by the letter “T”?
ANS: Titus
B2) Which praenomen was commonly abbreviated by“ M’ (M with an
apostrophe)”?
ANS: Manius
3. TOSSUP) From what Latin noun with what meaning does the English word
“radical” derive?
ANS: radix-root
B1) From what Latin noun with what meaning does the English word “radial”
derive?
ANS: radius-ray
B2) From what Latin noun with what meaning does the English word “reality”
derive?
ANS: res-thing
4. TOSSUP) Give the idiomatic meaning of the Latin phrase pedem referre.
ANS: (to) retreat
B1) What Latin idiom, which includes a different compound of e , means “to
make war” or “to make an attack”?
ANS: be
e e
B2) What is the idiomatic meaning of sē o e e?
ANS: (to) proceed, (to) go, (to) betake oneself
5. TOSSUP) What use of the Ablative case can be found in the following sentence:
aesa e b
e o s b s
e oe a a
ē
d s.
ANS: ablative absolute
B1) What two uses of the Ablative can be found in this sentence:
a
eē
as
b s ass b s.
ANS: Description and (Definite) Price

B2) What two uses of the Ablative can be found in this sentence?: Marcus est
e o
ē e a
e
ANS: Comparison and Respect/Specification
6. TOSSUP) Which of the following heroes did not fight at Troy: Diomedes,
Neoptolemus, Ajax, or Theseus?
ANS: Theseus
B1) Who from the previous list wounded two gods at Troy?
ANS: Diomedes
B2) Who from the previous list killed the Trojan prince Polites in front of his
father?
ANS: Neoptolemus
7. TOSSUP) Quid Anglice significat “testis”?
ANS: Witness
B1) Quid Anglice significat “testudo”?
ANS: Tortoise/turtle
B2) Quid Anglice significat “vitta”?
ANS: Ribbon/band/fillet
8. TOSSUP) What Dacian king defeated the Romans three times between 87 and
101 A.D. at Tapae?
ANS: Decebalus
B1) Where did the Romans finally defeat Decebalus?
ANS: Sarmizgethusa
B2) How did Decebalus finally die?
ANS: Suicide
9. TOSSUP) From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive the English
word “nascent”?
ANS: nascor-to be born
B1) From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive the English word
“usual”?
ANS: utor-to use
B2) From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive the English word
“rational”?
ANS: reor-to think
10. TOSSUP) What daughter of Menoeceus bore the children of her son, who stabbed
out his own eyes when he found out that his wife was his mother?
ANS: Jocasta
B1) Who was Jocasta’s son and husband, who stabbed out his eyes with her
brooch?
ANS: Oedipus
B2) Who were Jocasta’s sons/grandsons, who fought for control of Thebes after
Oedipus’ exile?

ANS: Polyneices and Eteocles
11. TOSSUP) What is the meaning of the Latin conjunction autem?
ANS: however/moreover/but/now/on the other hand
B1) What is the meaning of the Latin adverb tandem?
ANS: at last/finally
B2) What oft-confused Latin adverb means “still” or “nevertheless”?
ANS:
e
12. TOSSUP) Who, in flight from a god, prayed to be stripped of her beauty and was
turned into a laurel tree by her father?
ANS: Daphne
B1) Who was Daphnes’s father?
ANS: Peneus
B2) What god was chasing Daphne?
ANS: Apollo
13. TOSSUP) Using two subjunctive verbs, translate the following sentence into
Latin: If I shoud go to Rome, I would be very happy.
ANS: Si Romam eam, laetissimus/a sim.
B1) Translate into Latin: After I saw the dog in the road, I kept on walking.
ANS: os os a
d
dēba
a e
a b ba .
B2) Translate into Latin: I am a teacher whom the students love to praise.
ANS: a s a a s e s
a
e ds
ds
ae
a e a d e.
14. TOSSUP) Who entered the town of Iolcus, which had been ruled by his father
until his uncle usurped the throne, wearing only one sandal?
ANS: Jason
B1) Who was Jason’s father, the former ruler of Iolcus?
ANS: Aeson
B2) Who was Jason’s uncle, who had usurped the throne of Iolcus?
ANS: Pelias
15. TOSSUP) What Roman emperor is said to have bought the empire at auction?
ANS: Didius Julianus
B1) From whom did Didius purchase the empire?
ANS: The Praetorian Guard
B2) What predecessor of Didius had the Praetorian Guard assassinated?
ANS: Pertinax
16. TOSSUP) What city did Heracles sack because its king, Laomedon, refused to
give his daughter Hesione to Heracles in payment for slaying a sea-monster?
ANS: Troy
B1) Herakles left one of Laomedon’s sons alive to rule Troy. Whom did he leave
alive?

ANS: Priam or Podarces
B2) Give the other name of that man.
ANS: Priam or Podarces.
17. TOSSUP) Quot sunt unus et duo?
ANS: tres
B1) Quid est bis quinque?
ANS: decem
B2) Quot sunt decem et unus?
ANS: undecim
18. TOSSUP) From what Latin adjective with what meaning do we derive the English
noun “peer”?
ANS: par-equal
B1) From what Latin adjective with what meaning do we derive “mitigate”?
ANS: mitis-soft
B2) From what Latin adjective with what meaning do we derive “dulcimer”?
ANS: dulcis-sweet
19. TOSSUP) Which third century emperor was the first to be born in Africa?
ANS: Septimius Severus
B1) In what city was Septimius Severus born?
ANS: Leptis (Lepcis) Magna
B2) What rival of his did Septimius defeat at the Battle of Issus in 194 A.D.?
ANS: Pescennius Niger
20. TOSSUP) Of the words o s se
s o
d ēs, and lectus, which is
being described in this Latin sentence?
a o es daba
e e es
o
ēs ob ss o e e e
o o
ANS: se
s
B1) Of the words o s se
s o
d ēs, and lectus, which is being
described in this Latin sentence? e o
o
.
ANS: lectus
B2) Of the words o s se
s o
d ēs, and lectus, which is being
described in this Latin sentence? s o s e
o
es .
ANS: portus

Harvard Certamen
Intermediate Round 3
TOSS-UP 1: The Harvard Classical Club hopes you are enjoying the tournament so far. The
Club also hopes you are enjoying your visit to Harvard's campus today, and that you can get to
know Harvard a little bit better during your time here. There is a lot to learn, because Harvard
has been around for a long time. In fact, it was founded in the year 1636. Express 1636 in
Roman numerals. MDCXXXVI
Bonus: Harvard is 57 years older than the next oldest institution of higher learning in the
United States. Say 57 using Latin words. QUINQUAGINTA et SEPTEM
Bonus: The lawn outside is called Tercentenary Theater. Harvard celebrated its 300th
anniversary in 1936. Express 1936 in Roman numerals. MCMXXXVI
TOSS-UP 2: You probably know that Harvard's motto is veritas, which means truth. Give the
comparative form of its root adjective, verus. VERIOR
Bonus: Change verior to the superlative. VERISSIMUS
Bonus: Give the adverbial forms of verior and verissimus. VERIUS, VERISSIME
TOSS-UP 3: The John Harvard statue famously tells three lies: the wrong founding date, the
wrong founder, and a false depiction of John Harvard. Nobody's perfect. I will tell you four
things about another statue, Galatea, which was sculpted by Pygmalion and then came to life, but
three of the things I tell you will be lies. You tell me what is true. First, she was sculpted in
Athens; Second, the name Galatea was applied to her only in modern times; Third, she had a son
named Paphos; and Fourth, Vergil tells the most famous version of her story. ANS: SECOND,
the name Galatea was only applied in modern times (note that Paphos was a daughter)
Bonus: Now tell me what is the true statement about Niobe, the boastful mother who
was turned into a weeping stone. First, she was a daughter of Tantalus and sister of Pelops;
Second, she married Zethus who ruled in Thebes; Third, she boasted her children were better
than Leda's; and Fourth, she had 18 children combined. ANS: FIRST, she was a daughter of
Tantalus and sister of Pelops
Bonus: Now tell me what is the true statement about Laelaps, the infallible hound who
was turned to stone after meeting prey destined never to be caught. First, Zeus originally gave
Laelaps as a watchdog to Io; Second, Minos later gave the hound to his wife Pasiphae; Third,
Pasiphae gave it to Cephalus; Fourth, Cephalus loaned it to Amphitryon to help him hunt the
Teumessian Vixen. FOURTH, Cephalus loaned it to Amphitryon...
TOSS-UP 4: Everyone knows that Harvard football was the team of the 90s. That's right,
Harvard won several national championships in the 1890s, and did it fair and square. What

Roman leader, on the other hand, dominated a decade in the gladiatorial arena with a little help
from his imperial authority? COMMODUS
Bonus: 130 Harvard students or graduates have competed in the Olympics, with at least
one athlete in every modern Olympic games since they began in 1896. To what mythological
founder of the ancient Olympics did Commodus like to compare himself? HERCULES /
HERACLES
Bonus: What emperor similarly scored a sensational number of triumphs on a singing
tour of Greece? NERO
TOSS-UP 5: When you read an entry in the Oxford Classical Dictionary that concludes with the
signing initials E.B., it was written by Ernst Badian, professor emeritus from the history
department here at Harvard. His office was right next door in Robinson Hall. Name the
historical figure whom Professor Badian begins to describe in the following lines from the
Oxford Classical Dictionary: This person “born circa 138 BC of an old, but not recently
prominent, patrician family, after a dissolute youth inherited a fortune from his stepmother,
which enabled him to enter the aristocratic career. Chosen by Gaius Marius as his quaestor, he
distinguished himself in the Numidian War, finally securing the surrender of Jugurtha by
Bocchus...”. Lucius Cornelius SULLA Felix
Bonus: Fill in the following blank from the same entry by Professor Badian about Sulla:
“Given the command against Mithridates Eupator by the senate, he was deprived of it by the
tribune Publius Sulpicius Rufus, who transferred it to Marius in order to gain Marius' aid for his
political plans. Sulla pretended to acquiesce, but finding support among his troops, who hoped
for rich booty in Asia, he marched on BLANK and took the unprepared city by force.” ROME
Bonus: Fill in the following blank from the same entry: “During 81 he enacted a
legislative programme designed to put power firmly in the hands of the BLANK, whose numbers
(traditionally 300, but now much reduced) he raised to 600 by adlecting equites supporting him.”
SENATE
TOSS-UP 6: There is a long historic rivalry between the Harvard Crimson newspaper and the
Harvard Lampoon humor publication. In 1953, the Crimson editors pranked the Lampoon by
stealing the large copper Ibis perched atop Lampoon headquarters and presenting it as a gift to a
Soviet ambassador on behalf of the students of America, all at the height of the Cold War.
Translate the Latin word which has the same spelling as Ibis, spelled i-b-i-s. YOU WILL GO
Bonus: The Lampoon has pulled a few pranks of its own. According to legend,
Lampoon president Conan O'Brien led a group of students pretending to be construction workers
to jackhammer a sidewalk in Boston. He called the Boston police to complain that students were
posing as construction workers to jackhammer the sidewalk. Then he called the state police to
complain that students were posing as Boston police to obstruct his construction crew. Hilarity
ensued, and somehow he didn't suffer expulsion. From what Latin word with what meaning is
expulsion derived? PELLO, PUSH or EXPELLO, PUSH OUT

Bonus: According to Lampoon legend, the best prank of 1933 was purloining the sacred
cod, a nearly five-foot statue of a fish that hangs prominently in the chamber of the
Massachusetts House of Representatives. It was quietly returned. Say in Latin, sacred fish.
PISCIS SACER
TOSS-UP 7: The Harvard Law School is just north of the yard, past the Science Center. Its
main building and library is Langdell Hall. Over the entrance to Langdell are engraved the
words “non sub homine sed sub deo et lege.” Translate that. NOT UNDER MAN BUT
UNDER GOD AND LAW
Bonus: Within the main reading room of Langdell, just below the high ceiling and
completely circling the room, are inscribed Latin phrases. Translate this quotation from Cicero
which is found there: lex est summa ratio insita in natura. LAW IS THE HIGHEST REASON
IMPLANTED IN NATURE.
Bonus: Translate this line which is also found on Langdell's walls. scire leges non hoc
est verba earum tenere sed vim ac potestatem. TO KNOW THE LAW IS NOT MERELY TO
UNDERSTAND THE WORDS, BUT AS WELL THEIR FORCE AND EFFECT.
TOSS-UP 8: What deity, the son of Apollo and Coronis, and father of physicians Podaleirius
and Machaon, had his name adopted in the title of a early club of the Harvard Medical School
because of his powers for healing? ASCLEPIUS / AESCULAPIUS
Bonus: The Aesculapian Club, as it was called after his Roman name, held an annual
formal dinner. The Harvard Archives retains the dinner favors from these meetings, which often
involved a symbol with which Aesculapius was associated, especially snakes. The famous
temple to Aesculapius was located in a particular place because a snake was seen to escape there
from the ship that brought Aesculapius' statue from Epidaurus to Rome. Where in Rome was
Aesculapius' temple? TIBER ISLAND
Bonus: In 1910, dinner guests of the Aesculapian Club received a blue glass sculpture of
a different animal which was often sacrificed to Asclepius. According to Plato's Apology,
Socrates' final request was a sacrifice of this animal to Asclepius. Name this animal, which is
the male counterpart of what in Latin is called a Gallina. ROOSTER (if "chicken," prompt for
more information)
TOSS-UP 9: Every year Harvard and Yale look forward to the grand showdown of their bitter
rivalry, known simply as “The Game.” I will describe for you a play from a Harvard-Yale
football game in which Harvard once again vanquishes the Elis of New Haven, and you will tell
me which battle of the Punic Wars it most resembles. Listen carefully. Yale is running out of
time on Harvard's home field and needs a big play. And look: they've got a wide receiver, the
quarterback's brother, running a deep route, and he's open! This could be the break that Yale's
been waiting for - it's in his fingertips. But … wait … one of Harvard's safeties comes out of
nowhere to take him down and knock the ball loose. Wow, what a hit – it knocked his helmet
off! And to add insult to injury, while the receiver is carried off the field, Harvard tosses the
helmet into the Yale huddle. Go Crimson! METAURUS river

Bonus: Name the classical figure who couldn't keep his head on straight at the Metaurus?
HASDRUBAL
Bonus: In what year was the battle of Metaurus River? 207 BC
TOSS-UP 10: Harvard's fight song “Ten Thousand Men of Harvard” contains a verse sung in
Latin. Translate the verse's fifth line, "Gaudeamus Igitur". LET US THEREFORE REJOICE
Bonus: Now translate the next line of the verse: “Veritas non sequitur?” TRUTH DOES
NOT FOLLOW (whether intoned as a question or not)
Bonus: Translate this line of the verse: Domine salvum fac. GOD SAVE him; LORD
MAKE him SAFE; etc. etc.
TOSS-UP 11: When you think Harvard, think sports. The college offers 41 Division 1 sports,
more than any other institution in the country, and has collected 138 NCAA national
championships despite not offering athletic scholarships. The Harvard track team would love to
recruit what swift adventurer who was so fast that he could run across the waves without getting
his feet wet? EUPHEMUS
Bonus: Harvard also has 28 club sports. Which Greek hero and Argonaut would be a
great addition to the Harvard Archery club, based on his exploits at Lake Stymphalus?
HERACLES
Bonus: Name one of the two helmsmen of the Argo who could lend guidance to the
Harvard Crew team? TIPHYS or ANCAEUS
TOSS-UP 12: The Harvard Law school offers a semester-long course devoted entirely to Roman
Law. Previous final exams have consisted in part of identifying the legal actions that could be
brought following a series of negligent mishaps that occur in the ancient Roman forum. What
Roman officials who occupied a post in the cursus honorum were most involved in deciding
legal disputes? PRAETORS
Bonus: What is the term for the group that was commissioned to draft the 12 Tables of
law in the early Roman Republic. DECEMVIRI
Bonus: What Eastern Roman emperor of the 6th century AD authorized the collection
and compilation of Roman laws in a single body of civil law, or Corpus Iuris Civilis, which
famously included his Digest and his Code. JUSTINIAN the first
TOSS-UP 13: Not everyone can finish at Harvard. Bill Gates dropped out to pursue what he
considered better things. Many of the keystrokes used to operate his software are derived from
Latin. Which of the following keystrokes, if any, is not derived from Latin: Control, Alt,
Delete. ALL ARE DERIVED FROM LATIN

Bonus: Another more recent Harvard drop-out developed a popular creation the Romans
might have called liber vultuum. What do we call it? FACEBOOK
Bonus: Actor Matt Damon also attended Harvard but moved onto bigger and better
things before graduating. Which of Matt Damon's early films might the Romans have called
benevolentia venans? If you aren't familiar with the film, give your best translation. GOOD
WILL HUNTING
TOSS-UP 14: This is a visual question. I will pass out the visuals face down. Do not turn them
over until instructed…. Now that everyone has a copy of the visual, please turn them over and
take 10 seconds to review…. Erich Segal, a notable Harvard alumnus, passed away in February.
Segal was an admired scholar of the classics, but much more famous for his popular works of
literature, which included the Harvard-inspired novel and screenplay, Love Story. Segal was
also the Latin Salutatorian for the class of 1958, and delivered the Latin salutatory at
commencement in that year right outside this building. Which of these excerpts contains a
deponent verb? A (sequimur)
Bonus: Which of the excerpts contains a future active participle? D (donaturi)
Bonus: Which contains a future passive participle? B (dormienda)
TOSS-UP 15: One of the more recent Latin Salutatories compared the Harvard experience to a
certain film series which the Romans might have called Bella Stellaria, but which we know as
Star Wars. Translate this line from the salutatory: Vita nostra Harvardiana, videtis, similis est
Bellis Stellaribus. OUR HARVARD LIFE, YOU SEE, IS SIMILAR TO STAR WARS.
Bonus: The speech described a certain rival from southwestern Connecticut as mortifera
stella novi portus. Translate that. the DEATH-bearing STAR OF NEW HAVEN (harbour, port,
etc.)
Bonus: The Salutatory concluded by saying: Precor ut illa Vis Harvardiana semper
vobiscum sit! Translate that. I PRAY THAT THE HARVARD FORCE MAY ALWAYS BE
WITH YOU.
TOSS-UP 16: The oldest building in the Yard is Massachusetts Hall, built in 1720. When
George Washington first took command of the Continental Army, he did so at the Cambridge
Common just past Massachusetts Hall, and the building itself sheltered soldiers of his army.
Washington then prepared to lay seige to Boston, eventually forcing the British evacuation.
What leader besieged Rome in 476 AD, deposing Romulus Augustulus and bringing the end of
the Western Roman empire? ODOACER
Bonus: What leader besieged Rome in 410 AD? ALARIC
Bonus: What leader besieged Rome in 455 AD? GAESERIC

TOSS-UP 17: A popular course for many years here has been the Concept of the Hero in Greek
Civilization, taught by Professor Nagy. One of the subjects of the course is a participant of the
Trojan War who had been named by his grandfather, received a scarring wound to this thigh in
youth, was nursed by Eurycleia, married a daughter of Icarius, attempted to refuse joining the
other Greeks at Troy by feigning madness, but ultimately brought them victory by envisioning
the Trojan Horse. Name this Greek. ODYSSEUS (not Ulysses)
Bonus: When Odysseus tried to pretend he was mad by sowing his fields with salt, what
leader put Odysseus' son before the plow to prove it was just a trick? PALAMEDES
Bonus: What was the name of the son that Odysseus would not plow over?
TELEMACHUS
TOSS-UP 18: John Quincy Adams was required to pass an entrance exam in Latin and Greek to
begin at Harvard in 1786. For one of his questions, he was asked to translate a passage of
contemporary English into Latin on the spot. The passage began: “There cannot certainly be a
higher ridicule than to give an air of importance to amusements.” Adams translated that part as
follows: “Nihil profecto risu dignior quam magni aestimare delectamenta.” For your question,
give the case, gender, and number of delectamenta. NEUTER ACCUSATIVE PLURAL
Bonus: Give a literal translation of dignior. MORE/RATHER WORTHY
Bonus: Change the form aestimare to the perfect tense. AESTIMAVISSE
TOSS-UP 19: The most imposing building in Harvard Yard is Widener Library, the centerpiece
of the largest university library system in the world. Widener houses 57 miles of bookshelves,
12 stacked levels, and approximately 3 million volumes including a Gutenburg Bible. The
library was funded with a donation in honor of Harry Elkins Widener, a young Harvard graduate
and book collector, who died during the sinking of the Titanic. What mythological character
died while swimming from Abydos to the shores of Sestos and his love, the maiden Hero.
LEANDER
Bonus: According to an apparently false legend, one of the stipulations for the Widener
gift was that all students take swim lessons. Of course, that wouldn't have helped Harry Widener
much. Nor would it have helped Leander. Specifically, what happened on Hero's side of the
Hellespont that prevented Leander's arrival? the storm winds BLEW OUT the CANDLE they
were using as a beacon
Bonus: According to legend, one of the stipulations of the Widener donation was that no
bricks of the structure would ever be moved. When renovations were needed after time, Harvard
complied by building a connecting bridge to another library through one of Widener's windows,
and creating reading rooms in what were formerly interior atriums. What two mythological
architects inserted a movable stone in the vault of Hyrieus to allow them to come back later and
steal his treasure? TROPHONIUS and AGAMEDES

TOSS-UP 20: Two of Harvard's most prominent buildings are Memorial Hall and Memorial
Church. What Latin adjective is related to the root of Memorial? MEMOR
Bonus: Harvard's honoring of its Civil War dead in Memorial Hall extends only to the
Union soldiers. Students who fought for the confederacy were never named. What two-word
expression from Latin refers to condemnation of memory. DAMNATIO MEMORIAE
Bonus: Emerson Hall, just next door, features an exterior inscription of the biblical
verse: “What is man that thou are mindful of him.” Say “mindful of him” in Latin using memor
and a form of the Latin pronoun is, ea, id. MEMOR EIUS

HARVARD CERTAMEN - ROUND 3 VISUAL, ALL LEVELS
Excerpts from Latin Salutatory of Erich Segal, ’58
A.
Tu primum praeses, purpurate Pusei, aster altissime. Te sequimur O delictum decus academiae cuius
rebus gestis nunc videmus, “Quantum religio possit suadere ... donorum!
(TRANSLATION): You first of all O purpled Pusey, starry summit, we follow your lead, the chosen glory
of academia. We see indeed your achievements prove the maxim, “God's influence gains affluence.”
************************************************************************************

B.
Carissimi ac doctissimi professores, sine vobis, vita enim una perpetua dormienda esset nox.
(TRANSLATION): Esteemed and learned professors, without your influence, life would be an
interminable sleepy night.
************************************************************************************

C.
Nec vos omittamus, puellae pulcherrimae Radcliffianae, quas socias studemus vivendi, ridendi, bibendi...
Musae nostrae, numquam maiora canamus
(TRANSLATION): Nor shall we overlook you, beautiful Radcliff demoiselles whom earnestly we seek as
companions for living, laughing and quaffing.... O our Muses, never can we sing a loftier theme.
************************************************************************************

D.
Donatores - (identidem donaturi ut speramus) vobis palma parata quod palmas nostras complestis. “O
fons Pecuniae splendidior vitro, nobis lucem -per- lucrum dedistis!”
(TRANSLATION): O generous bestowers of gifts (who'll give again and again, we hope!) “the palm is
yours,” for you've filled our palms. “O fount of funds more splendid than crystal,” you have given us
light-through-lucre!

Harvard Certamen 2010
Intermediate Semifinal Round
1. TOSSUP) What heroic son of Glaucus battled against the Solymi and the
Amazons and defeated the monstrous Chimaera with the help of the winged horse
Pegasus?
ANS: Bellerophon
B1) What deity helped Bellerophon tame Pegasus?
ANS: Athena
B2) What sister of Stheno and Euryale was the mother of Pegasus?
ANS: Medusa
2. TOSSUP) Translate the following sentence into Latin: Our general knows that
Roman soldiers are the best.
ANS: Imperator noster scit milites Romanos esse optimos.
B1) What is the name of the grammatical construction found in that sentence?
ANS: Indirect statement/indirect discourse
B2) Now this translate this sentence into Latin: “The general knows that the
Roman soldiers will wage war.”
ANS: Imperator scit milites Romanos bellum gessuros esse.
3. TOSSUP) What road, constructed in 312 BC, was built by the famous censor
Appius Claudius Caecus?
ANS: Via Appia (Appian Way)
B1) To what Adriatic port did the road eventually extend?
ANS: Brundisium
B2) What Roman road extended through the Roman Forum?
ANS: The Via Sacra
4. TOSSUP) What Phaeaecian princess came to the aid of Odysseus when he
washed ashore onto her homeland?
ANS: Nausicaa
B1) Who was the father of Nausicaa?
ANS: Alcinous
B2) Who was the mother of Nausicaa?
ANS: Arete
5. TOSSUP) Ignoring meaning, which of the following verbs does not belong
grammatically?: do e o
o
ae
ANS: ae (does not take the double accusative construction)
B1) Which one of these verbs does not belong grammatically: e s adēo be
a e ed se
?
ANS: be (does not take a dative)
B2) Now, using be , translate into Latin: I order you to run.
ANS: be ē
e e.

6. TOSSUP) What Asiatic enemy of Rome organized the simultaneous slaughter of
80,000 Italian and Roman citizens in 88 B.C.?
ANS: Mithridates VI
B1) How many wars did Rome have to fight before finally subjugating
Mithridates's Pontic kingdom?
ANS: Three
B2) Which Roman general of the Mithridatic wars was also responsible for
introducing the cherry tree to Rome?
ANS: Lucullus
7. TOSSUP) The English noun “coin” derives from what Latin noun meaning
“wedge”?
ANS: cuneus
B1) From what Latin noun with what meaning do we derive “imbriferous”?
ANS: imber-rain
B2) From what Latin noun with what meaning do we derive “omelet”?
ANS: lamina-plate
8. TOSSUP) When a Roman citizen sat down to write a letter, several items were
essential to the process. Some of these items were the stilus, tabella, linum, cera,
and signum. Which item from the previous list was the seal, used to secure the
letter against improper inspection and to attest to the letter’s genuineness?
ANS: signum
B1) All but the longest letters were written on wax tablets, which were preferable
because they were inexpensive and could be reused over and over again. Which,
amongst these items: stilus,tabella, linum, cera, and signum, was the wax tablet?
ANS: cera
B2) For very long letters, wax tablets were too unwieldy to be used. What lighter,
though more expensive, material would a Roman use when writing a longer
letter?
ANS: papyrus
9. TOSSUP) Translate the following sentence into English: “Nescimus quid sit
nobis faciendum.”
ANS: We don’t know what we should do/We don’t know what is to be
done by us.
B1) Translate the following sentence into English: “Semper tibi parendum est a
filio tuo.”
ANS: Your son must always obey you.
B2) Translate the following sentence into English: “Veto te ire domum amatoris
tui, mulier perfida mea.”
ANS: I forbid you to go to the house of your lover, my
treacherous/perfidious woman/wife.
10. TOSSUP) The prepositions instar and tenus both take what case?
ANS: Genitive

B1) What case follows the verbs o e , es s , and ēd ?
ANS: dative
B2) What case follows the adjective
s, a
s, and proximus?
ANS: dative
11. TOSSUP) Which Italian city and Roman enemy was led against Rome first by its
king Gaius Cluilius and then by the dictator Mettius Fufetius, and finally
represented in battle by the Curiatii brothers?
ANS: Alba Longa
B1) Who reigned as king of Rome during the battle of the Horatii and the
Curiatii?
ANS: Tullus Hostilius
B2) Which of Rome’s seven kings was supposed to have descended from the
royal line of Alba Longa?
ANS: Romulus
12. TOSSUP) Complete the following grammatical analogy: a
e sse debe
___________?
ANS: debuisse
B1) Now complete this analogy: a
a a b s e
?
ANS: euntibus
B2) Finally, complete this grammatical analogy: celer: celeriter:: dulcis:
___________?
ANS: d ē
13. TOSSUP) Who was the first and only Roman emperor to voluntarily abdicate his
position?
ANS: Diocletian
B1) Who was the first and only Roman emperor to be captured as a prisoner of
war?
ANS: Valerian
B2) Who was the first and only Roman emperor to buy his position at an auction?
ANS: Didius Iulianus
14. TOSSUP) Distinguish in meaning between uxor and utor.
ANS: uxor=wife/spouse, utor=to use
B1) Distinguish in meaning between nemo and ulmo.
ANS: nemo=no one, ulmo=elm (tree)
B2) Distinguish in meaning between the verb se
and the noun sententia.
ANS: se
=feel/realize, sententia=opinion/sentence/thought
15. TOSSUP) Whom did Medea kill and throw overboard the Argo in order to delay
her pursuers from Colchis?
ANS: Apsyrtus (Absyrtus)
B1) Who purified Medea and Jason of this crime?
ANS: Circe

B2) How was Circe related to Medea?
ANS: Aunt
16. TOSSUP) If your medication has the letters “q.i.d” which stands for “quater in
die,” how many times should you take it per day?
ANS: four
B1) If your medication reads “p.o”, how should you take it?
ANS: Through your mouth.
B2) If your medication reads “mane,” when should you take it?
ANS: In the morning
17. TOSSUP) At what battle in 197 B.C. did Titus Quinctius Flamininus decisively
defeat the Macedonian king Philip the V?
ANS: Cynoscephalae
B1) What war did this end?
ANS: The Second Macedonian War
B2) Who succeeded Philip as king of Macedon?
ANS: Perseus
18. TOSSUP) What daughter of the river god Evenus was abducted by Idas in a
winged chariot, and eventually chose to marry him over Apollo?
ANS: Marpessa
B1) Who had given Idas this winged chariot?
ANS: Poseidon
B2) Why did Marpessa choose Idas over Apollo?
ANS: She was afraid Apollo would desert her in her old age.
19. TOSSUP) What form of the adjective sacer agrees with the noun form hostium?
ANS: sacrorum
B1) What form of the adjective bonus agrees with the noun form amori?
ANS: bono
B2) Make bono amori accusative plural.
ANS: Bonos amores.
20. TOSSUP) Who attempted to rape a cloud shaped like Hera and was punished for
his lust by being strapped to a flaming wheel in the underworld?
ANS: Ixion
B1) What was the name of this cloud?
ANS: Nephele
B2) Who was the child of this unholy and unnatural union?
ANS: Centaurus

Harvard Certamen 2010
Intermediate Final Round
1. TOSSUP) What independent use of the subjunctive is found in the following
sentence? “Tu ne quaesieris, Leuconoe, quem tibi finem di dederint.”
ANS: Prohibitive
B1) What dependent use of the subjunctive is found in that same sentence?
ANS: Indirect Question
B2) What use of the subjunctive is found in the following sentence? “Miser
Catulle, desinas ineptire.”
ANS: Jussive
2. TOSSUP) What Greek hero, the leader of the Epigoni, fulfilled a promise to his
father Amphiaraus by killing his treacherous mother Eriphyle?
ANS: Alcmaeon
B1) Who was Eriphyle’s brother, the leader of the Seven Against Thebes?
ANS: Adrastus
B2) What father of Diomedes also fought in the Seven Against Thebes?
ANS: Tydeus
3. TOSSUP) For the verb volo, give the third person plural imperfect active
subjunctive.
ANS: Vellent
B1) Change vellent to the perfect.
ANS: Voluerint
B2) Change voluerint to the passive.
ANS: This cannot be done.
4. TOSSUP) Quid Anglice significat “praesertim”?
ANS: Especially
B1) Quid Anglice significat “repente”?
ANS: suddenly, unexpectedl
B2) Quid Anglice significat “moleste”?
ANS: Annoyingly, distressingly
5. TOSSUP) What fisherman from Anthedon fell in love with Scylla?
ANS: Glaucus
B1) Unfortunately for the pair, what witch was in love with Glaucus?
ANS: Circe
B2) What monster did Circe transform Scylla into?
ANS: 6-headed dog
6. TOSSUP) Translate into English the motto of Michigan, “si quaeris amoenam
paeninsulam, circumspice”.
ANS: If you’re seeking a pleasant peninsula, look around.

B1) Give and translate the motto of California.
ANS: Eureka (“I have found it”)
B2) Translate the motto of Michigan, “Ense petit placidam sub libertate
quietem.”
ANS: By the sword she/it/he seeks peaceful quiet under liberty.
7. TOSSUP) During the 1st Punic War, what Spartan mercenary general saved
Carthage from a Roman invasion?
ANS: Xanthippus
B1) What Roman general did Xanthippus defeat to do this?
ANS: (Marcus Atilius) Regulus
B2) During the 1st Punic War, what Carthaginian Admiral beached Claudius
Pulcher’s fleet at Drepana?
ANS: Adherbal
8. TOSSUP) What centaur generously hosted Heracles but died after he picked up
one of the hero’s poisoned arrows and dropped it onto his foot?
ANS: Pholus
B1) Heracles had brought out these arrows to fend off an attack by the other
centaurs. Why were these centaurs mad at Heracles?
ANS: He had opened their communal wine.
B2) Pholus was unusually civilized for a centaur. What other centaur, the son of
Cronus and Philyra, was similarly wise and kind?
ANS: Chiron
9. TOSSUP) What two uses of the dative case are found in the following sentence?
“Caesar milites auxilio peditibus misit.”
ANS: Purpose and Reference
B1) What is the name given to this construction, which uses datives of reference
and purpose?
ANS: Double dative
B2) The datives of separation and disadvantage are really varieties of what
broader use of the dative?
ANS: Dative of Reference
10. TOSSUP) To what Etruscan city did Tarquinius Superbus flee after being
deposed in 510 B.C.?
ANS: Clusium
B1) What Prince agreed to restore Tarquinius Superbus to his throne?
ANS: Lars Porsenna
B2) In what year was Etruscan power finally destroyed at the battle of Lake
Vadimo?
ANS: 283 B.C.

11. TOSSUP) From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive the English
noun “prize”?
ANS: Pretium (“prize”)
B1) From what Latin noun with what meaning do we derive “duel”?
ANS: Bellum (“war”)
B2) From what Latin noun with what meaning do we derive “resuscitate”?
ANS: Cito (“stir, move, arouse”)
12. TOSSUP) Give the comparative and superlative forms of the adjective malus.
ANS: Peior and Pessimus –a -um
B1) Give the comparative and superlative forms of the adjective exterus.
ANS: Exterior and Extremus –a -um
B2) Give the comparative and superlative forms of the adjective inferus.
ANS: Inferior and Infimus –a –um
13. TOSSUP) What battle of 84 A.D was the only notable victory of the Romans over
the Caledonians?
ANS: The Battle of Mons Graupius
B1) Who was the victorious Roman commander?
ANS: Agricola
B2) What Roman author, also his son-in-law, wrote a history of Agricola's
campaigns in Britain?
ANS: Tacitus
14. TOSSUP) What king exiled his son Phyleus for arguing that Heracles should be
paid for cleaning the king’s stables?
ANS: Augeas
B1) What two rivers did Heracles use to clean the king’s stables?
ANS: Alpheus and Peneus
B2) Prior to their dispute, Heracles and Augeas had both been part of what group?
ANS: The Argonauts
15. TOSSUP) Of the supine, gerund, future active participle and present active
infinitive, which CANNOT express purpose in classical prose?
ANS: Present Active Infinitive
B1) Using a supine, change the sentence venerunt videre Romam into correct
Latin prose.
ANS: Venerunt visum Romam.
B2) Translate “they came to see Rome” into English by using a gerundive.
ANS: Venerunt Romae videndae (Romam videndi) causa
16. TOSSUP) Which emperor embarked on a grand tour of the Roman empire in 121
A.D., and expressed his love for Greek culture by growing a beard?
ANS: Hadrian
B1) Who was the only emperor before Hadrian to sport a beard?
ANS: Nero

B2) By building a colony on Jerusalem, Hadrian created much discontent. Who
eventually led the Jews in rebellion against Roman rule?
ANS: Simon Bar Kokhba (Shim'on [Ben] Bar Cosiba)
17. TOSSUP) What figure of speech is found in the following sentence? “Nihil a me
de pueritiae suae flagitiis peccatisque audiet, nihil ex illa impura adulescentia
sua.”
ANS: Preterition
B1) What figure of speech is displayed by the phrase “mors ac poena”?
ANS: Hendiadys
B2) What figure of speech is displayed by the phrase “puer ille est tam pessimus
quam Satanus”?
ANS: Hyperbole
18. TOSSUP) What brothers rescued their mother from Antiope from captivity before
ruling jointly as kings of Thebes?
ANS: Amphion and Zethus
B1) What cruel uncle of hers had imprisoned Antiope in a tower?
ANS: Lycus
B2) What wife of Lycus did Zethus and Amphion punish severely for her role in
mistreating Antiope?
ANS: Dirce
19. TOSSUP) Translate the following sentence into Latin: “We drank the milk in
order to please our mother.”
ANS: Lac bibimus ut placeremus matri (nostrae).
B1) Translate into Latin: “They were so good that they pleased their mother.”
ANS: Tam boni erant ut matri (eius) placerent.
B2) Translate into Latin: “They were bad in order not to please their mother.”
ANS: Mali erant ne placerent matri (eius).
20. TOSSUP) Who was the Numidian king who precipitated a war with Rome when
he executed Italian and Roman merchants who had sided with his brother,
Hiempsal, in a battle for the city of Cirta in 112 BC?
ANS: Jugurtha
B1) Jugurtha’s downfall came about when his own father-in-law betrayed him
and handed him over to the Romans. What was the name of this father-in-law?
ANS: Bocchus
B2) Over what kingdom did Bocchus rule?
ANS: Mauritania

Harvard Certamen 2010
Intermediate Extra Questions
Round 1
1. HISTORY EXTRA: Until he died of the plague in 169 AD, what man was coemperor with Marcus Aurelius?
LUCIUS VERUS
a. BONUS: Of what previous emperor was Lucius Verus the adopted son?
HADRIAN
b. BONUS: Lucius Verus celebrated a triumph for his victory over
Vologeses IV. Over what Eastern Empire was Vologeses IV the ruler?
PARTHIA
2. MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: What son of Oineus was killed by his uncles for
arguing that Atalanta should receive the fleece of the Calydonian Boar?
MELEAGER
a. BONUS: What mother of Meleager caused his death after she found out
about her brothers’ demise?
ALTHAEA
b. BONUS: Name either of these uncles.
TOXEUS or PLEXIPPUS
3. LANGUAGE EXTRA: Translate the following sentence into English: “Cornelia
dicit se Marcum valde amare.”
CORNELIUS SAYS SHE LOVED MARCUS A LOT
a. BONUS: Translate the following sentence into English: “Cornelius dicit
se Marcum valde amaturam esse.”
CORNELIUS SAYS SHE WILL LOVE MARCUS A LOT.
b. BONUS: Translate into Latin: “Cornelia dixit se Marcum valde
amavisse.”
CORNELIA SAID SHE HAD LOVED MARCUS A LOT.
4. LANGUAGE EXTRA: Quid Anglice significat “gelu”?
FROST, ICE, SNOW
a. Quid Anglice significat “imber”?
RAIN
b. Quid Anglice significat “gutta”?
DROP, TEARDROP

Round 2
1. HISTORY EXTRA: Which of Rome’s seven kings was assasinated in conspiracy
headed by his own daughter?
SERVIUS TULLIUS
a. BONUS: What was this daughter’s name?
TULLIA
b. BONUS: Who was Tullia’s husband?
TARQUINIUS SUPERBUS
2. MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: Who took over as king of Thebes after Cadmus retired?
PENTHEUS
a. BONUS: What god engineered the death of Pentheus?
BACCHUS
b. BONUS: What mother of Pentheus tore him to death?
AGAVE
3. LANGUAGE EXTRA: Give a synonym of the Latin word mare.
PONTUS, AEQUOR, OCEANUS, PELAGUS, ALTUM, FRETUM,
GURGES, VADUM, AESTUS
a. BONUS: Give another.
SEE ABOVE
b. BONUS: Give two more.
SEE ABOVE.
4. LANGUAGE EXTRA: Translate the following sentence into English: “Utrum
stupidus an sapiens, hic puer mihi carus erit.”
WHETHER STUPID OR WISE, THIS BOY SHALL BE DEAR TO ME.
a. BONUS: Translate the following sentence into English: “Tantae
sententiae sunt quanti homines.”
THERE ARE AS MANY OPINIONS AS MEN
b. BONUS: Translate the following sentence into English: “Hic amat
scientiam, hic feminas.”
THIS MAN LIKES KNOWLEDGE, THAT ONE LIKES
WOMEN
Round 3
1. HISTORY EXTRA: Before his defeat of what general did Constantine dream of
the words “in hoc signo vinces”?
MAXENTIUS
a. BONUS: Who was Constantine’s father?
CONSTANTIUS CHLORUS
b. BONUS: Who succeeded Constantine as emperor?
CONSTANTINE II
2. MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: Who was the Greek god of sleep?
HYPNOS
a. BONUS: What area of sleep was governed by Hypnos’ sons?
DREAMS

b. BONUS: Which son of Hypnos took the form of humans in dreams?
MORPHEUS
3. LANGUAGE EXTRA: Distinguish in meaning between calidus with one ‘l’ and
callidus with two ‘l’s.
CALIDUS=warm; CALLIDUS=clever, skilled
a. BONUS: Frons can mean ‘leafy branch.’ What else can it mean?
FOREHEAD
b. BONUS: Ius can mean soup. What else can it mean?
LAW, RIGHT
4. LANGUAGE EXTRA: What construction is featured in the following sentence?
“Magister noster docebit nos linguam Latinam.”
DOUBLE ACCUSATIVE
a. BONUS: Name another verb that takes a double accusative.
FACIO, CREO, PRAEFICIO, VOCO, APPELLO, DECLARO
(there may be others).
b. BONUS: Name one more.
SEE ABOVE.
Semifinals
1. HISTORY EXTRA: What early rival city of Rome fell in 396 BC after a ten-year
siege?
VEII
a. BONUS: What conqueror of Veii was dictator five times?
(MARCUS FURIUS) CAMILLUS
b. BONUS: What garrison city held by Veii had previously fallen to Rome?
FIDENAE
2. MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: What king of the Rutulians was incited by the fury
Allecto into fighting against Aeneas and the Trojans?
TURNUS
a. BONUS: What Latin princess did Aeneas and Turnus fight to marry?
LAVINIA
b. BONUS: Turnus was not the only suitor that Aeneas ticked off. What
African prince did Dido scorn in favor of Aeneas?
IARBAS
3. LANGUAGE EXTRA: Fear clauses, proviso clauses, relative clauses of
characteristic, purpose clauses and result clauses are all dependent usages of what
mood?
SUBJUNCTIVE
a. BONUS: What word or words introduce a negative purpose clause?
NE
b. BONUS: What word or words introduce a negative result clause?
UT NON
4. LANGUAGE: Quid Anglice significat “coram”?
IN THE PRESENCE OF

a. BONUS: Quid Anglice significat “propter”?
ON ACCOUNT OF
b. BONUS: Quid Anglice significat “procul”?
FAR FROM

Finals
1. HISTORY EXTRA: What law enacted in 287 BC gave plebiscita the binding
force of law?
LEX HORTENSIA
a. BONUS: The Lex Hortensia was enacted in response to a plebeian
succession. What earlier laws of 449 BC were also enacted in response to
a plebeian succession?
THE TWELVE TABLES
b. BONUS: What was the name of the commission appointed to write up the
code that eventually became the Twelve Tables?
THE DECEMVIRI
2. MYTHOLOGY EXTRA: Who was the most beautiful daughter Priam?
LAODICE
a. BONUS: Who was the eldest daughter of Priam?
ILIONE
b. BONUS: How did Laodice die?
SHE WAS SWALLOWED BY THE EARTH
3. LANGUAGE EXTRA: Give the first person plural, imperfect passive subjunctive
of the verb ludo, ludere.
LUDEREMUR
a. BONUS: Change luderemur to the pluperfect.
LUSI SIMUS

b. BONUS: Change lusi simus to the passive.
LUSISSEMUS
4. LANGUAGE EXTRA: Many Latin words are used in metaphorical or extended
senses beyond their literal sense. What noun meaning “strength” is more literally
translated “oak tree”?
ROBUR
a. BONUS: What noun meaning “foliage” is more literally translated “hair”?
COMA
b. BONUS: What verb meaning “to depend upon” is more literally translated
“to hang”?
PENDEO or DEPENDEO

