2005 VJCL State Finals Certamen
Upper Level – Round I
1. Mantua mē genuit, Calabrī rapuēre, tenet nunc / Parthenope; cecinī pascua rūra
ducēs. What epic poet is believed to have dictated this epitaph in 19 BC from his
deathbed in Brundisium? ANS: Vergil (Publius Vergilius Maro)
a. Ducēs refers to Vergil’s Aeneid. To what other works of Vergil do the
words pascua and rūra refer? ANS: Eclogues (Bucolics) and Georgics
2. What name is common to Odysseus’ faithful dog, the all-seeing guardian of Io,
and the builder of Jason’s famous ship? ANS: Argus
a. What name is common to the Muse of comedy and the “graceful” sister of
Aglaea and Euphrosyne? ANS: Thalia
3. In the first poem of Book I of the Amorēs, Ovid writes Pār erat īnferior versus;
rīsisse Cupīdō / dīcitur atque ūnum surripuisse pedem. According to this couplet,
what is Cupid said to have stolen? ANS: One foot (of the line/meter) (v. supra,
ūnum … pedem)
a. According to this couplet, what besides stealing that foot is Cupid said to
have done? ANS: Laughed (v. supra, rīsisse)
4. Which tense of the participle is often used in poetry to show purpose, intention or
readiness? ANS: Future (active)
a. Using a future active participle, say in Latin: “the dog comes to the
kitchen with the intention of eating the food”. ANS: Canis cibum ēsurus
(ēsura)* ad/in culinam (per)venit. *N.B.: also accept various synonyms
for ēsurus (ēsura): consūmpturus (consūmptura) / cēnāturus (cēnātura) /
pasturus (pastura) (can also take ablative) / pransurus (pansura) /
assūmpturus (assūmptura), BUT NOT gustāturus (gustātura) b/c while
this means “taste” transitively it appears only to mean “eat” (literally, “to
have a snack”) when used intransitively
5. Ptolemy Philadelphus, Alexander Helios and Cleopatra Selene are the three
children of what ambitious couple, one a Roman triumvir, the other an Egyptian
queen? ANS: Marcus Antonius (Marc Antony) and Cleopatra (VII)
a. BONUS: What son did Cleopatra bear from a previous relationship with
Gaius Julius Caesar? ANS: Caesarian / Ptolemy Caesar
6. What current movie, based on a gritty comic book, might have its title translated
into Latin as Urbs Peccatī? ANS: Sin City
a. A pistor can be either a baker or what other profession related to wheat
and grain? The word for this profession also happens to be the last name
of the author of the Sin City comic books. ANS: Miller
7. Using the deponent verb sequor, say (in Latin) to one person, “Follow me.”
ANS: Mē sequere
a. BONUS: Now, using the verb capiō say in Latin, “Do not take the toga
away from me, girls!” ANS: (Ā) mē, puellae, togam capere nolīte! / Nē,
puellae, (ā) mē togam capiātis!

i

2005 VJCL State Finals Certamen
Upper Level – Round I
8. What nephew of Toxeus and Plexippus fought with his uncles after killing the
Calydonian Boar because he insisted on giving its precious hide to Atalanta?
ANS: Meleager
a. BONUS: The dispute with his uncles ended badly, with Meleager
ultimately killing them both. Althea, Meleager’s mother, however, did not
take this news death well. Specifically, how did Althaea avenge the death
of her slain brothers? ANS: She tossed the log that was tied to Meleager’s
life into a fire, causing his death (when Meleager was a newborn, the Fates
had appeared to Althaea and revealed that a certain log in the fireplace
was the key to her son’s life)
9. TOSS UP (History): In what narrow mountain pass did Gavius Pontius and the
Samnites trap the Roman army in 321 BC, during the Second Samnite War?
ANS: Caudine Forks / Furculae Caudīnae
a. BONUS: When the Roman army was forced to surrender, what
humiliation did the soldiers have to suffer? ANS: Passing under a “yoke”
(of Samnite spears), stripped of their arms and weapons.
10. If you win this round you will probably leap out of your chair in exultation. The
English noun exultation, as well as its cognate verb exult, derive from the Latin
preposition ex and what verb meaning “to jump or leap”? ANS: saliō (salīre,
saliī / saluī, saltus / -a / -um)
a. BONUS: If you were exultantly proud and joyful, you would be elated;
but please, try not to get too carried away by your glee. Both the English
adjective elated and its cognate noun elation derive from the Latin
preposition ex and what verb meaning “to bear or carry”? ferō (ferre, tulī /
tetulī, lātus / -a / -um)
11. What genre did the following authors write in common? Ammianus Marcellinus,
Cornelius Nepos, Sallust, Tacitus and Livy? ANS: History
a. BONUS: What genre do these writers have in common? Perseus, Juvenal
and Horace. ANS: Satire (do NOT accept “comedy”)
12. Who am I? I am the hero who gave the thugs Periphetes and Sciron (among
others) a taste of their own medicine. After those adventures, I arrived in Athens
and captured the Bull of Marathon. Luckily my father Aegeus recognized me
soon after and saved me from drinking Medea’s poison. Eventually, I became his
successor to the throne of Athens. Who am I? ANS: Theseus
a. BONUS: Later in my life, I concocted a rather foolish plan with my pal
Pirithous. We decided that each of us would marry a daughter of Zeus.
What daughter of Zeus and Leda, who was raised in Sparta, did we kidnap
when she was only 12? Another fellow would also carry this girl away
several years later because she was considered the most beautiful woman
in the world. ANS: Helen

ii

2005 VJCL State Finals Certamen
Upper Level – Round I
13. What was the primary job function of a lanista? ANS: To train gladiators (for
fighting in the gladiatorial games)
a. BONUS: Hopefully, the lanista did their job particularly well when
training the fighters known as andabatae. What specific disadvantage did
an andabata have to overcome when fighting? ANS: The fighter could
not see (had to fight while blind-folded)
14. At various times, Coronis, Marpessa, Cyrene, Hyacinthus, Cassandra and Daphne
were all objects of what Olympian deity’s affection? ANS: (Phoebus) Apollo
a. BONUS: Apollo’s love affair with Coronis ended disastrously when the
crow tattled on her affair with a mortal man. In a jealous rage, Apollo
killed Coronis but snatched their unborn infant son from her body. Who
was this boy who ultimately became the world’s greatest physician and the
god of medicine? ANS: Asclepius (Aesculapius)
15. Which of the following phrases is an example of the ablative of “time within
which” construction? prīmā aestāte, tribus diēbus, multōs annōs, posterā hōrā
ANS: tribus diēbus (within/in three days)
a. Now translate into English the other three time-related expressions listed:
i. prīmā aestāte – early in the summer / at the beginning of summer /
(at/in/on) the first summer
ii. multōs annōs – for many years
iii. posterā hōrā – (at/in/on) the following/next/subsequent/ensuing
hour
16. What Olympian goddess lent a chariot drawn by winged dragons to a man named
Triptolemus, who flew through the air sewing corn and teaching people how to
cultivate the fields? ANS: Demeter (Ceres)
a. BONUS: Demeter helped Triptolemus and several other mortals when she
wandered the earth after Persephone’s abduction. What city in particular
showed her great hospitality and became famous throughout the ancient
world as the site of Demeter’s mysteries? ANS: Eleusis
17. Wealthy Roman men had a type of slave who would walk behind the master and
quietly prompt him in case he had forgotten the name of anyone who greeted him.
What is the name for such a slave? ANS: Nōmenclātor(ēs)
a. BONUS: To our eyes, Roman masters must have resembled NBA
superstars with their constant posse of attendants accompanying their
every move in public. What was the name for the posse of slaves who
cleared the way in front of their master if he chose to travel by foot that
day? ANS? Anteambulō(nēs)

iii

2005 VJCL State Finals Certamen
Upper Level – Round I
18. Translate the following Latin sentence into English: Est mīrābile audītū! ANS:
“It is wonderful/remarkable/extraordinary/amazing to hear!” (ablative supine of
respect)
a. BONUS: Now translate this sentence into Latin, using only FOUR
alliterative words: “Vitellius came to see the cow.” ANS: Vitellius
vaccam vīsum vēnit.
19. Who am I? I am a gentleman of Verona, and an accomplished Neoteric lyric
poet. While I enjoy sitting around writing clever little lines of poetry with my
buddy Licinius Calvus, nothing brings me greater joy (or anguish) than my
girlfriend Clodia. Who am I? ANS: (Gaius Valerius) Catullus
a. BONUS: Scholars classify Catullus as an Alexandrian or Neoteric poet
because of his short but learned and elegant writing style. What librarian
and poet, whose poems Catullus mentions translating in Carmen 65 for his
friend Hortalus, is the “father” of the Alexandrian school of poetry? ANS:
Callimachus (also accept Battiadēs but in this case, clarify that this was an
alternate, literary name for Callimachus derived from the name of
Cyrene’s founder, Battus)
20. As this round comes to a close, you may want to keep in mind South Carolina’s
state motto, which translates into English as, “While I breathe, I hope.” Give the
Latin for this motto. ANS: dum spirō sperō
a. BONUS: In recognition of their recent championship in college basketball,
it seems appropriate to ask you about the Latin motto of North Carolina.
What is this Latin motto, which translates into English as “to be rather
than to seem”? ANS: esse quam viderī

iv

